Synaxarium
The Bool of the Saints of
The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Translation of
Sir E. A. Wallis Budge

Printed by the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Debre Meheret St. Michael Church
Garland, TX USA
(Not for Sale)

The Book of the Saints of
The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church

Contents
MESKEREM
TEKEMT
HEDAR
TAHSAS
TIR
YEKATIT
MEGABIT
MIYAZIA
GINBOT
SENNE
HAMLE
NEHASSE
PAGUEMEN

Pages
-

1
62
117
178
251
328
380
443
488
548
602
677
731

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE FIRST MONTH
Meskerem 01
(September 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
This blessed month of Maskaram is the first of the circle of the years of Egypt and
Ethiopia. The [first] day and the night of this month are equal--twelve hours. Then the
day during this month Maskaram diminisheth because this month is the first of the circle of
the years of Egypt and Ethiopia. Now it is meet that we should make therein a great feast
in all purity, because this day is holy and blessed, and we should remove ourselves from
evil works. And we should begin [to do] good works and new, whereby God is pleased,
even as Paul the apostle saith: “Behold, every work is made new in Christ. Behold old
works have passed away, and behold new works are known, and every work is from God”
(2 Corinthians 5:17). Thus hath God had pleasure over us in Christ, and He hath given us
the ministration of His mercy and compassion. And Isaiah the prophet saith: “The Spirit
of God is upon me; therefore hath He appointed me and sent me to preach to those who are
in captivity, and to those who are in prison, and to set them free, and to the blind that they
may see the light, and to those who are bound that they be set free, and to preach the year
of the mercy of God” (Isaiah 61:1-2). And David saith: “Thou hast blessed the crown of
the year [with] mercy, and the desert is satisfied with dew by Thy blessing” (Psalm 65:11).
On this day also Job the righteous man washed in the water of the Tekaze and was healed
of all his sickness. And the people were in the habit, when the river Tekaze was full of
water, of dipping themselves in the new water, whereby they were blessed for all the rest
of the year.
On this day died the holy Apostle Bartholomew, who was one of the Twelve Apostles. To
this apostle the lot fell that he was to go to the city of El-wah (the great Oasis, Al-Hargah).
He and Peter went together to the people there, and they preached to them, and called them
to the knowledge of God. After that they performed before them signs and great wonders,
which terrified their hearts. After this Peter contrived to go into the city, and there he sold
Bartholomew to be a slave, and Bartholomew worked in the vineyard with his master.
And when he was preparing the young plants for planting out, they burst into flower and
bore fruit immediately. When the son of the governor of that city died, Bartholomew the
apostle raised him up from the dead. And all the people believed, and Bartholomew
strengthened them in the knowledge of God. After this our Lord Jesus Christ commanded
him to go to the city of Barbar (i.e. the city of the Barbarians), and He sent to him Andrew
the apostle with his helper to help him. And the people of that city were exceedingly
wicked, and they would not receive the apostles who were working before them signs and
wonders. And God commanded one of the Dog-faced cannibals to submit to the apostles,
and not to resist them in anything, which they ordered him to do, and they took him with
them to that city. And the men of that city brought out wild beasts against the apostles to
eat them up, and straightway that Dogface rose up against those wild beasts, and rent them
asunder, and he also slew a great many of the men of that city. Because of this all the
people were afraid and they turned, and did homage at the feet of the apostles, and they
submitted to them, and they entered the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ--to Him be glory!
1

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And he appointed priests over them, and built churches for them, and the apostles left them
praising God.
And Bartholomew the apostle departed to the cities, which were on the seacoast, whereof
the people knew not God, and he preached unto them and converted them to the knowledge
of God. And they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ. And Bartholomew the apostle
commanded the men to be pure, and to be remote from fornication. When Agrippa the
king heard of him he was exceedingly angry with him, and he commanded his servants to
put the Apostle Bartholomew in a hair sack and to fill the sack up with sand, and to cast
him into the sea; and they did so. And thus Bartholomew consummated his martyrdom.
On this day died the holy father Abba Melyos, Archbishop of the great city of Alexandria,
the third from Mark, the apostle and evangelist, and this archbishop was appointed in the
twelfth year of the reign of Vespasian the Emperor of Rome, fifty-four years after the
Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ. He pastured and guarded the flock of our Lord Jesus
Christ nobly, and he sat on the Episcopal throne twelve years. And he pleased God and
died in peace.
And on this day died the righteous and excellent Abba Melki. The fathers of this righteous
man were among the nobles of Kuelzem (Kolsum, i.e. Clysma), which city is on the
borders of Egypt; they were rich in gold and silver, and they gave alms to the poor and
needy. His father loved God exceedingly, and he had no son. One day he saw the children
learning their lessons, and in their hands were tablets whereon were written, “Let us
remember our fathers who have taught us by their lives so that we may become children of
God. O God, make their souls to have rest in the heavens with the righteous and the
martyrs.” And when the father of Abba Melki heard these words from the mouths of the
children he was very sorrowful saying, “Woe to me, for I have no son. Who will
remember me when I die?” And he and his wife gave themselves up with zeal to fasting,
and prayer and the giving of offerings. And God heard their petition and He gave them
two children at once, a boy and a girl; and they rejoiced greatly in them. And the father
brought them up as Christians, and he called the boy Melki, and his sister Sefna, which is
being interpreted “Dove.” And he had them reared very carefully. And when the boy was
seven years old his father took Melki to a teacher, and he taught him all the Books of the
New and Old Testaments. And the Holy Spirit came upon him in full measure, and he did
not play with the other children or indulge in games with them, but he read the Scriptures
day and night. And when the boy was twelve years old, the parents of the children called
him and spoke with him about their wish to take a wife for him, so that they might have a
memorial; but Melki was not pleased with this, and pretending to agree with them he said,
“I consent to your words, and that which ye order me to do I will do.” Now his soul
wished to flee from the world. Then Abba Melki said unto his father, “I wish to make a
festival for the children who are at school with me”; and his father gave him ten hundred
dinars in gold so that he might make a feast according to his desire, and he ordered the
servants and the waiting men to minister unto him according to his wish. Then Abba
Melki mounted his horse, and went out before his father and said unto his serving men,
“Take ye one hundred dinars in gold and make haste and prepare a feast for us; I will go
alone and invite my companions thereto.” And his serving men hearkened to his voice,
and turned away, and he departed by himself. The money, which he had, he distributed
among the poor and needy, and his horse he gave to a certain poor man, and he had
nothing left except the clothes, which were on him. And as his return was delayed his
2

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
serving men sought for him, but they could not find him, and they turned back weeping;
and they told his father and mother and they wept a bitter weeping. His sister’s eyes by
reason of her excessive weeping went blind and she died. And Abba Melki went to Debra
Tur, which was the monastery of his mother’s brother Mar ‘Awgin. And this ‘Awgin was
a righteous man and he worked many signs, and under his authority there were seventytwo chosen monks. And Abba Melki prostrated himself at his feet, and he said unto him,
“I wish to dwell under thy shadow, and I wish thee to array me in the garb of the monk.”
And Abba ‘Awgin said unto him, “From what city comest thou?” And he told him that
Kuelzem was his city, and that he was the son of ‘Awgin’s sister; and when ‘Awgin heard
this he rejoiced with a great joy, and he permitted him to be a probationer for three years,
and he arrayed him in the garb of monasticism. And he contended with such great vigor in
the ascetic life and kept such strict vigil always, that his fame was heard of in all the
country of Persia. And when he had been a monk for three years God gave unto him the
gift of healing and he was able to drive out devils by his word. One day whilst he was
walking about by himself reciting the Psalms he came to a place where there was a hollow,
and in the hollow was a fig tree, and there were a great many shepherds weeping there.
And Abba Melki said unto them, “Why do ye weep?” And they said unto him, “The son
of the governor of the city was eating figs here, and whilst he was doing so a great snake
came out and swallowed him up, and the boy hath gone into its belly.” And whilst they
were telling him this, the father of the boy with the people of the city arrived, and their
clothes were rent and they were beating their faces; and he made entreaty to Mar Melki on
behalf of his son. And Mar Melki said unto him, “Fear not, O my son, believe in God and
thou shalt see a wonderful thing,” and he turned his face towards the east and stretched out
his hands and prayed for a long time. And when he had finished his prayer he summoned
the serpent in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and commanded to cast up the boy from
inside him; and he cast up the boy who had suffered no pain whatsoever. And Satan, who
was inside the serpent, cried out and said, “Whither can I go from thee, O Melki, thou man
of Kuelzem?” And having said these words he dissolved himself into smoke. And when
the father of the boy saw that his son was alive he brought gold and silver to the holy man.
And Melki refused to accept it from him, but he said unto him, “Let us become partners in
the building of a monastery for me.” And the father of the boy rejoiced and he built him a
monastery, which contained 300 cells for the monks, and he enclosed the building with a
wall and provided iron gates therefore. Whilst they were building the church they found in
one corner a huge stone, which could not be raised by 300 men, but by the prayer of this
righteous man the church was built out of that stone even as the builder wished. Then
there assembled there 500 souls and they were chosen monks. And the report of the holy
man was heard throughout the country, and the people used to bring unto him the sick folk
who were suffering from sicknesses of every kind, and those who were possessed of
devils, and they were all healed of their diseases through his prayer, and the men of Persia
and Rome were saved through the intercession of this righteous man. And when Satan,
who is the enemy of good, saw this righteous man, he was jealous of him, and he went to
the daughter of the King of Rome and drove her silly, and she dried out and said, “There is
no healing for me except through Melki of Kuelzem.” And the king her father hearkened
unto her, and sent 400 men from his army out unto all directions so that they might bring
Abba Melki with care to him, and he took an oath that if they did not do so he would cut
off their heads with the sword. And the soldiers who had been sent out found the holy man
with difficulty, and they bowed down at his feet, and they told him the king’s message, and
about the illness of his daughter, [and said,] “Tell us what thou sayest.” And Abba Melki
3

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
said unto him, “I am an old man, and I cannot travel to Rome.” And the soldiers said unto
him, “If thou wilt not go with us the king hath promised to put us to death.” When the
holy man heard this he was very sorry, and he said unto them, “O my children, go ye your
way, I and you will meet at the gates of Rome”; and when they heard his words they
departed. And at the end of the year, on the day when he knew through the Holy Spirit that
they would arrive in Rome, he prayed a prayer to God, and the Holy Spirit lifted him up
and bore him to the gates of Rome. And when the envoys found the holy man there they
rejoiced greatly and they told the king of his arrival; and the king rejoiced greatly and went
out and received him and brought him into his palace and seated him upon his throne, and
told him concerning his daughter’s sickness. And Abba Melki ordered that she be brought,
and when they had brought her, the devil hurled her down and rent her until they thought
that she was dead. And straightway Abba Melki rose up and prayed a long time, and he
sprinkled water over her face and anointed her with oil, and he commanded Satan in the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ to go forth from her. And Satan went forth from her in the
form of a black man, and the holy men seized him, and shut him up in the house, and
marked him with the sign of the Cross so that he should not go out. And when the king
saw this, he bowed down at Abba Melki’s feet, and he brought to him many possessions
for the needs of his monastery, and the holy man refused them. And the king said unto
him, “O my father, dwell here and I will build thee a monastery”; and the holy man said, “I
cannot forsake my children.” And the holy man dwelt in Rome for a few days, and healed
their demoniacs. And when he went out to return to his city, the king rose up and set him
on his way with [an escort of] soldiers, and he came to the gates of the palace. And the
holy man saw a great mass of stone, which had been hollowed out and had been placed at
the mouth of a fountain of running water, and a stone bowl so that horses might drink out
of it. And he said unto the king, “Give me these stones for the use of my monastery.” And
the king said unto him, “Who will carry for thee the stones which twelve men could not lift
and carry them outside the city. If however, thou hast the strength [to carry them] do thou
what thou pleasest.” Then the holy man brought the Satan forth from the place wherein he
had bound him, and he suspended the hollow stone from his neck, and he bound the bowl
on the top of his head, and he ordered him to go before him. When the king saw this he
marveled exceedingly, and he turned and glorified God. And Saint Abba Melki made the
Satan to come into his monastery carrying these stones, and the ordered him to set them
down at the gates, and they are there to this day. And he shut up the Satan in a cave and
sealed him with the sign of the Cross so that he should not go forth again and tempt men.
And when this holy man had been a monk for forty and five years, a voice came unto him
from heaven saying, “Behold the day of thy death hath drawn nigh, and there remains unto
thee three days only before thou shalt enter into everlasting joy.” Then the holy man
summoned his children and he commanded them to serve God and to keep themselves
away from the error of Satan. After three days there came unto him the fathers of the
monks, Abba Antony, and Abba Macarius, and Abba Sinoda, and Abba Besya, and Abba
Pachomius, and they said unto him, “Come, O our brother, and rejoice with us in the
kingdom of the heavens.” And when they had said this unto him, his soul went forth from
his body and the angels took it up into glory singing as they went, and they said, “He hath
toiled in the world and he shall live for ever”; and they brought him into the Garden of
Delight. And the archbishops, and the bishops and the priests assembled and they buried
him in the church, and innumerable signs and wonders took place at his grave.

4

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day is celebrated the festival of Raguel, the angel, one of the nine archangels,
who informed Enoch concerning the fire which burneth, and the destruction of the world;
and he is the angel of lights. May the intercession of this angel be with us all.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 02
(September 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint John the Baptist, son of Zacharias the priest, became a martyr by the
hand of Herod the wicked king. This John the prophet rebuked Herod because of
Herodias, the wife of Philip, for he had married her and taken her to be his wife, and John
said unto him, “It is not right for thee to take thy brother’s wife.” And Herod took Saint
John and cast him into prison, and he kept him there because he was afraid of him. And
when his birthday came Herod made a feast for the nobles of his kingdom and for the
magistrates of the city of Galilee. And his brother’s daughter came and stood up among
the festal company and she danced and pleased the king, and he swore an oath that he
would give her anything which she might ask from him, even if it were as much as the half
of his kingdom. And she went out to her mother, and she said unto her, “What shall I ask
the king to give me?” And her mother said unto her, “Ask him to give thee the head of
John the Baptist lying in a bowl.” And when Herod heard this he was exceedingly sorry,
but because of his oath and also because of those who were sitting at meat with him, and
because he did not wish to be put to shame, he straightway commanded his servants to cut
off the head of Saint John, and to give it to the maiden. And they cut off the head of John
in the prison house and gave it to the daughter of Herodias in a bowl and she gave it to her
mother. And there was great consternation that day, and their joy was turned to sorrow.
And when the holy head of Saint John was cut off, it flew up into the air out of the hands
of the soldiers, and it cried out, saying, “It is not right for thee to take thy brother’s wife”;
and it is said that the head is at the present time in the country of Arabia. And the disciples
of the holy man came and took his body and carried it away and laid it in a grave [where it
lay] until the days of Saint Athanasius, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And God
commanded him to uncover the body of Saint John, and Saint Athanasius did so and laid it
up by him until he could build a church for it. May his intercession be with us.
And on this day died Dasya the soldier, a native of the city of Tayda of Egypt. Arianus,
the governor of the city of Antinoe, inflicted great tortures on this saint, and he cut off his
head with a sword, and Dasya received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven.
And on this day also Didymus and the holy woman Marina became martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

5

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 03
(September 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the General Council of Bishops took place in the city of Alexandria in the
second year of the rule of the glorious father Abba Dionysius the archbishop. This
assembly took place because of certain evil men who had appeared in the country of
Arabia, and who believed that the soul dieth with the body, and that on the day of the
Resurrection it shall be raised up with it. And they composed a discourse on the wicked
belief and sent it to the men who were living in the city of Alexandria. And when the
Abuna, the Archbishop Abba Dionysius heard this thing he was exceedingly sorry about it,
and he admonished them and commanded them to turn from this evil affair, but they would
not hearken unto him. Therefore the Council assembled to discuss them, and he debated
the matter with them, and made manifest their error, but they neither repented nor turned
away from their evil counsel; and the archbishop and the whole Council anathematized
them and cursed them. And he wrote a discourse on them wherein he said, “the love of
God for the children is exceedingly great and mighty.” And he explained in that discourse
that the soul neither dieth, nor perisheth, nor decayeth, but that it abideth even as the angels
abide, for it is a spiritual thing and is immutable and incorruptible. When it goeth forth
from the body it is taken to the place for which it is suitable. And on the day of the
Resurrection, when the trumpet soundeth, and dead bodies of men shall rise up by the
command of their Creator. And all the souls of men shall go each into the body whereto it
belongeth, and it shall rise with it, and according to its work it will either rejoice for ever,
or suffer punishment for ever. And the two (i.e. soul and body) will remain in the state in
which they have risen forever and forever and ever. May the prayer of this Council be
with us. Amen.
And on this day also a great earthquake took place in the country of Egypt and in all its
borders, and the church of Dasya fell down at the time of the third hour of the day. And
this church was in the name of Michael the archangel. And it is said that a certain ungodly
man asked the Christians to pay tax to him, but they would not give him anything; and
when it was evening this man came with his followers and pulled down the church. This
happened in the ninth year of Archbishop Abba Macarius, in the eight hundred and twentyeighth year of the Holy Martyrs [A.D. 1112]. May their prayers and blessing be with us.
Amen.
And on this day are commemorated Dioscoros the martyr, and Archbishop Dionysius, and
the martyrs who were in Tensel Yakoton, and many martyrs in Persia. May their prayer
and blessing, etc.
And on this day died Abba ‘Anbes (Father Lion) of the country of Ethiopia.
And on this day died Abba Muse (Moses) of the desert of Scete.
When this man became a monk he forsook the world, and departed into the desert, and he
put himself under the yoke of fasting and prayer until God lightened his eyes to see a
garden of olive trees and palm trees. At the beginning of each month he took what fell of
the fruit of these trees, and ate it, and the amount of food which he was in the habit of
6

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
eating was like that of a small bird. And his apparel was made of the fiber and bark of the
palm. And the heat of summer and the cold of winter attacked him, but in spite of these he
devoted himself to his prayer and fasting. And he had no knowledge of letters and
writing. And all the various kinds of wild animals of the desert used to visit him, and he
made friends with them and when the time of prayer drew nigh he made a sign to them
with his hand and they departed. And when there was a time of want they would come and
stand before him as if they wished to speak to him, and he knew through the Holy Spirit
what they were seeking after, and he would bring down rain for them; and he lived in this
manner for thirty and five years. And Satan was jealous of him, and he disguised himself
and took the form of a very aged monk, and appeared in front of the cave of Muse (Moses)
and walked along limping. When the holy man saw him he thought that he was a dweller
in the desert. And he went to him and took him into his cave and he continued in prayer
for three days. And when the wild animals that used to visit the holy man saw these old
men, they withdrew from him. Then that old man asked the holy man concerning his
country and his belief, and Abba Muse (Moses) told him all his work, and asked the old
man in return concerning his city and belief. And the old man said unto Abba Muse
(Moses), “As for me I have lived in the world and have committed sin for many years, and
I have begotten a daughter. Then when I remembered the transitoriness of the world, I
came out into the desert and have lived herein for forty years. I have remembered my
daughter and I can find no one to whom to marry her except thyself, and it is for this
purpose that I have come hither. When I die thou shalt bury me; I have orchards and
gardens and thou shalt inherit them all.” When Abba Muse (Moses) heard these words he
was terrified, and he said unto the old man, “How can I who am a monk do this?” And this
old man brought unto him testimony from the Scriptures how Abraham, and Moses, and
David, though they were righteous men, had married wives. And through this the old man
made the heart of Abba Muse (Moses) to yield. And he showed him a beautiful palace,
and in it there was a beautiful maiden, and there came before Abba Muse (Moses) a vision
wherein the old man was dead, and the holy man was weeping over him, and was
preparing his body for the tomb and then burying him. And when he went to consort with
the maiden a mighty wind arose and he was driven backwards. When his senses returned
the palace had disappeared, and the garden, and the maiden, and he was forced to go back
to his dwelling. And he wished to eat a meal of the fruit of the tree from which he ate
formerly, and the fruit was bitter in his mouth. And when famine compelled him he went
forth into the desert, and again he met Satan under the form of an aged pilgrim who was
going to Alexandria, and he was riding an ass, and was provided with meat and drink, and
he took him with him and brought him into the city and left him there. And Satan
appeared unto him in the form of a woman who was carrying water. And seeing him in the
garb of the men of the desert she asked him about himself, and he told her everything
which Satan had told him; and she laughed at him in her heart, and she took him to her
house and gave him meat and drink. And she told him the affair of her marriage, and how
she was the daughter of a king who was dead, and how she possessed much property.
When she saw that his heart inclined to her, she said to him also, “I am a Jewess and we
are many”; and then she seduced him with many crafty arts until he denied his Faith. And
again she said unto him, “Come, let us take possession of my property in the place where I
deposited it”; and she took him to an empty desert wherein there was no water. And she
took him up to the top of a mountain, and she transformed herself before him, and she said
unto him, “I am that Satan who leadeth very many into error. I seduced thee from the
desert, and I enticed thee away from thy Faith. Behold, thou shalt die in this desert, and
7

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
thy soul shall go into Gehenna”; and having said these things he disappeared from him.
And the holy man turned to his right hand and to his left, and there was no way to escape
and no water to drink. And as the matter pressed sorely upon him he fell down on the
ground and scattered dust on his face and he became dizzy and wept until his soul wished
to be set free from him. And God heard his cry, and He sent an angel unto him to console
him, and he said unto him, “Thy sin is remitted unto thee. In three days thou shalt die and
my servant Samuel, the dweller in the desert, shall bury thee.” And straightway Abba
Samuel came to him, and gave him peace, and comforted him, and took him with him into
the church which ‘Agabos the king had built in the desert which was hidden from the eye
of man, and it was the cemetery for the company of monks. And when they offered up the
Offering, and received the Holy Mysteries. And there, being a press of people Abba
Samuel departed to obtain a blessing at the grave of the saints. And when [Abba Muse
(Moses)] arrived there, he knelt down on his knees and died straightway; and Abba Samuel
buried him and wrote the history of him.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 04
(September 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Macarius, Archbishop of Alexandria; now he was
the sixty-ninth archbishop of the city. This father was an ascetic and practiced strenuous
self-denial from his earliest years, and he craved for the garb of monasticism. He went up
to the desert of Scete and became a monk in the church of Abba Macarius, and he
performed great and severe ascetic labors. He illumined his soul by reading the Holy
Scriptures and translations of (or commentaries on) them, and he learned the explanations
of them. He excelled in the working of righteousness, and he was appointed priest in the
desert of Scete. And when Abba Michael the Archbishop, his predecessor, died, the
bishops and many priests and doctors of the Orthodox Faith went to the monastery of Abba
Macarius, and they assembled in the church with the elder monks of Scete, and sat there
with them for many days debating and discussing the question of who would best fill this
honorable position. And they found that this Abba Macarius was the best man, and they
agreed unanimously to appoint him, because very many of the holy men of Scete testified
that he would best fill this position because of his righteousness, and his strenuousness and
self-abnegation, and devotion to the ascetic life. And they took him and bound him with
cords against his will, and he cried out and begged them to release him, and he said unto
them, “I am not qualified to be raised to the dignity of archbishop, for my mother married
two men.” Now they knew that he said this so that they might let him go. And many came
and bore witness concerning him, showing that his mother was a virgin and that she had
only married one man. Then they took him against his will, and they brought him to the
city of Alexandria, and they appointed him archbishop. Then they brought him to Mesr
(Cairo) and the deed of his appointment was read in the church of our Lady, the holy
Virgin Mary, of Mu’allakah in the Greek, Coptic and Arabic languages. And during the
whole time in which he sat he added to his works of righteousness daily, and he contended
most strenuously. Every day he taught the people and admonished them in the fear of
8

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
God. He gave alms and did works of mercy for the poor and needy. During the whole of
the period of his rule he never took anything from the Church, on the contrary he used to
give God Most High a large portion of the dues, which were paid to him. He sat as
archbishop for twenty and seven years, and he pleased God and died in peace.
And on this day also are commemorated Simon the anchorite, and Joshua the son of Nun,
the disciple of Moses, and ‘Ardase the archbishop, and 150 martyrs who suffered in
Antioch, and ‘Enteya, one of the Seventy, of the people of ‘Ensena, and Theodore the
bishop, from Debra ‘Eldanu, and theologian.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 05
(September 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Sophia and her two daughters whose names were ‘Aksosya and Barnaba
became martyrs; now this woman was a pagan and her parents worshipped idols. After
this she came to the Bishop of Manufe (i.e. Manuf Al-’Alia, or Panouf Res, capital of the
province of Manufiayyah) and believed in Christ, and said unto him, “I have believed in
thy God.” And after this he taught her all the Law of the Church, and he baptized her and
her daughters in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. Thereupon they
laid an accusation against her before Kaldeyanos (Claudianus), the governor of the city,
saying that she had become a Christian and had forsaken the worship of idols. And the
governor questioned her closely and she did not deny it, and he condemned her and her
daughters to be punished severely. And she exhorted them to be patient and said unto
them, “Be strong, my daughters, and endure like the daughters of Sophia, my lady
‘Angabenayt. I am her kinswoman and ye are as her daughters Pistis, ‘Alapis and
‘Agapis.” And they answered and said unto her, “Fear thou not, we will follow thy steps”;
and when they had said these things she kissed them devotedly. And when the governor
saw them embracing her, he ordered his men to scourge the mother with whips in order to
terrify the virgins. Then her daughters saw an angel of God come down and hide the body
of the holy woman, for the wicked men had striped her naked to beat her, and they rejoiced
and were glad. And whilst the men were beating their mother she never ceased to cry out,
“I am a Christian.” Then the governor commanded them to cut out her tongue down to the
root, and they did so, and even after this she ceased not to cry out and to shout at him.
After this the governor commanded them to take her into the prison, and he sent his wife
unto her to persuade her; and when she would not be persuaded he commanded them to cut
off her head with a sword, and they did so. And a certain woman took her body and hid it
in her house, and she lighted a lamp before it and burnt incense to it. Then the governor
summoned her daughters, and threatened them so that they might consent to obey him, but
when they refused him he cut off their heads one after the other; and thus they
consummated their martyrdom. And that believing woman took their bodies and laid them
side-by-side by the body of their mother. And many signs appeared at their graves. And
people with every kind of sickness were healed there. When Constantine was reigning he
heard the history of Saint Sophia and he took up her body and translated it to
9

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Constantinople. Before [he heard] her history his people built a church, and wrote upon a
tablet, “This is the house of Constantine”; and an angel of God came down and destroyed
it. And he wrote, “This is the house of Sophia", and although the workmen wanted to cut it
they left it written. One day whilst the son of the king was playing with his friends there,
the angel of God whose name was Rafael appeared unto them and said unto them, “What is
the name of this house?” And the youth said, “I do not know.” And the angel said unto
him, “Tell thy father to call it the house of Sophia." And the youth said unto him, “Wilt
thou wait here until I come back?” And the angel said, “I will.” And when his father
heard this he knew that it was an angel, and he killed his son, and said, “The angel will not
depart from that place because he must waif for the youth.” And that angel is there to this
day waiting for the youth. The length of that church is 709 cubits, its breadth is 309 cubits,
its pillars are in number 366, its doors are 4, its altars are 8, its pools of water are 4, and the
cherubim which are above the mercy seat have each two wings which overshadow the ark
of the Law of God. And they brought here the coffer of Saint Sophia, and the coffers of
her daughters with great honor and glory. And they buried that woman who had gathered
together their bodies with them. May the prayer of these holy women be with us. Amen.
And on this day also Saint Mamas became a martyr. His father was called Theodotus and
his mother was called Theophila. This man lived in the days of the reign of Yolyanos
(Julian) the emperor, and his position was that of governor of the city of ‘Awlatos. The
parents of this holy man were Christians, and because of their belief in Christ he had shut
them up in prison, and the mother of this holy man gave birth to him in prison. After his
father and his mother had died in prison, a certain Christian woman took the blessed child
and brought him up as her own son, and she called his name “Mamas,” the interpretation
of which is “orphan,” for he had neither father nor mother. And when he was fifteen years
old the people brought an accusation against him before the governor saying that he was a
Christian. And they took him and beat him with rods, and they hung him up head
downwards with a heavy lump of lead tied to him, and they cast him into the sea, but he
was saved from the sea by the might of God. And he hid himself under a cave and he fed
himself on the milk of the gamus, (i.e. buffalo), those great black animals of the desert.
Then the governor seized him again and cast him into the fire, but he was saved from the
fire by the power of God. After this, the governor’s men let loose lions upon him so that
they might rend him asunder, but by the power of God he leaped upon the back of a lion.
Then the governor tortured him, and his men dragged him on the ground, and tore out his
intestines with a three-pronged iron fork. By this torture the blessed Mamas consummated
his martyrdom, and received a crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. May
his prayer and blessing be with us. Amen.
[On this day also is commemorated Lebna Dengel, or Dawit (David) II Wanag Sagad,
King of Ethiopia from Aug. 15, 1508, to Sept. 2, 1540.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

10

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 06
(September 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great Prophet Isaiah, the son of ‘Amos, Manasseh having sawn him in
twain with a wood saw. This prophet prophesied in the days of the reigns of five kings,
that is to say Uziah, and Jotham, and Ahaz, and Hezekiah his son, and Manasseh the son of
Hezekiah. And he prophesied to Ahaz, saying, “A virgin shall conceive, and she shall bear
a son, and his name shall be called ‘Emanuel, the interpretation of which is, ‘God with us.’
And it shall come to pass that he shall teach the nations, and shall bring them into his
kingdom and into his faith, and he shall destroy the altars of the Jews and their priests.
And offerings of praise, bread and wine, shall be received from priests who shall be from
among the people” (Isaiah vii, 13 ff.). And he prophesied to Hezekiah and encouraged him
when Sanakrem (Sennacherib) the King of Persia (sic) besieged Jerusalem, and informed
him that God would blot him out because of his blasphemy against Him (Isaiah xxxvi).
And that night God sent Michael the archangel to the camp of Sanakrem (Sennacherib),
and slew of the soldiers 180,000 and 5000 men, and those who remained [alive] left the
camp and fled. And when Hezekiah the king was sick, God commanded him by the
tongue of this prophet to set his house in order for he was to die. And when Hezekiah
prayed to God, He sent unto him Isaiah the prophet who made known to him that God
added to his days fifteen years. And God showed him a sign so that he might be sure that
what the prophet had told him was true (Isaiah 38). And Isaiah prophesied concerning the
blotting out of the children of Israel, and he made manifest that only a few of them would
believe him. And God made rain to fall by reason of his prayer, when the people obeyed.
And on one occasion when he was thirsty God made to flow the spring of water of Siloam.
And Isaiah prophesied also to Manasseh the king, the son of Hezekiah, who established the
worship of idols, and he rebuked him because of his evil deeds. For this reason Manasseh
the king was wroth with him, and he sawed him in twain with a wood saw from his head to
his feet. And all the days of the prophesying of this prophet were seventy years, and more
than that. And he prophesied in the nine hundred and thirteenth year before the coming of
Christ our Lord.
Salutation to ‘Ebnodi.
And on this day also the holy woman Baslantya in the days of Diocletian, the emperor who
denied [Christ]. This holy woman was a Christian, and when she was nine years old the
deniers of our Lord seized her and bound her hands and her feet, and cast her into the fire;
but she was saved from the fire by the might of God. When she was thirsty she made a
petition to God for water, and He caused water to come down and she drank. Then she
committed her soul to the hand of God and cast herself into the fire, and she finished her
testimony.
And on this day also are commemorated James the monk, and ‘Atimos the bishop, and
Baslis, and ‘Arontos, and Rawrewo, and Sawlwas, and Sawa, martyrs of God.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

11

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 07
(September 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and blessed father Abba Dioscoros, Archbishop of Alexandria;
now he was the twenty-fifth archbishop of that city. His death took place on the island of
Gagra after a great debate about the Orthodox Faith at the Council, which the Emperor
Marcianus (A.D. 450-457), the denier of Christ, had convened and to which he had
summoned him. And when he arrived there he saw a great assembly containing six
hundred and thirty bishops. And Saint Dioscoros said, “In what is the Faith lacking that it
is necessary to gather this great assembly because of the Faith?” And they said unto him,
“This assembly hath been convened by the emperor’s command.” And Dioscoros said
unto them, “If this assembly hath been convened by the command of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to Whom be praise! I will remain, and I will utter with my tongue what Gad hath given me
to say; but if this assembly hath been convened by the emperor’s command, let the
emperor manage his assembly as he pleaseth.” Then the blessed Dioscoros tore up the
document wherein Leyon (Leo the Great, A.D. 440-461), Archbishop of Rome, had written
the wicked creed wherein he had assigned to Christ two Natures, and two Wills after His
Unity. And Saint Dioscoros spoke by the Holy Ghost before the assembly and showed that
our Lord Jesus Christ was One--He Who was invited to the marriage-feast in Cana of
Galilee as a man, and also He Who changed the water and made it sweet wine, for He is
God Almighty, and He is not separated in His works. And Abba Cyril, Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria, sent forth his testimony concerning the Word, and he said, “The union
of the Word of God with the flesh is like the union of the spirit with the body, and like the
union of fire with iron. And if there are two different Natures, and they are one in their
unity, similarly our Lord Christ is one Messiah and one Lord, and one Nature, and one
Will”; and none of those who were gathered together at that assembly dared to contradict
him. And some among them had gathered together at the Council of Ephesus, which had
been convened because of Nestorius, that infidel and enemy of our Lord Christ. And they
informed the Emperor Marcianus the infidel, and the Empress Belkarya, saying unto them,
“There is no one who resisteth your commands concerning the Faith except Dioscoros,
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria.” And they brought Dioscoros to the emperor, and
there were with him the senior bishops of the city and Council, and they debated the matter
among them from morning until evening, but Saint Dioscoros would not change his
Orthodox belief. And the emperor and the empress were irritated at this, and the empress
commanded them to smite Saint Dioscoros on his mouth, and to pluck out the hair of his
beard, and they did so. Then he took the hair of his beard, which they had pulled out, and
his teeth, which had dropped out, and sent them to the city of Alexandria, and he said unto
the people, “Behold, this is the fruit of the Orthodox Faith.” And when the bishops saw
what great tribulation had fallen upon Dioscoros, they became afraid for themselves lest
there should come upon them what had come upon Dioscoros. Therefore the bishops came
to an agreement with the Emperor Marcianus, the infidel, and they wrote with their hands
on his roll, saying as they did so with their tongues--may they be cut in pieces in Sheol!
And declaring that Christ hath two distinct Natures. And when Dioscoros returned, he sent
to them and ordered them to bring to him the roll whereon they had written. And they sent
it to him thinking that he would write on it even as they had done. And Saint Dioscoros
wrote at the foot of the roll and excommunicated them all. And he also excommunicated
12

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
every one who departed from the Orthodox Faith, which our fathers the Apostles, and our
holy fathers the Three Hundred and Eighteen Orthodox bishops who assembled in Nicea
laid down. And the emperor was wroth, and he commanded that Dioscoros should be
banished to the island of Gagra. And they took him there, and with him was Abba
Macarius, bishop of the city of Kaw, and four others fled. And those six hundred and six
bishops were sitting in Chalcedon. And when they had taken Saint Dioscoros to that place,
there came upon him great tribulation through the bishop of that district, for he was a
Nestorian. And he treated him with great contempt until God performed by the hands of
Saint Abba Dioscoros signs and mighty wonders, and all [the people] bowed down at his
feet, and were subject unto him, and they magnified his greatness. Thus God honors His
chosen ones in every place. And Abba Dioscoros said unto Abba Macarius, “Thou shalt
receive the crown of martyrdom in the city of Alexandria”; and he sent him with certain
believing pilgrims to the city of Alexandria, and there he ended his testimony according as
Dioscoros prophesied concerning him. And Saint Dioscoros having ended his good fight
and pleased God, departed from this transitory world, and received the crown of his
fidelity and entered into everlasting life. He died in the island of Gagra, and they laid his
body there.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Sawiros (Severianus), Bishop of the city of
Gabla (Byblos). The name of the father of this holy man was ‘Ablaryanos (Apollinaris),
and he studied foreign wisdom in the city of Athens. He went to the city of Caesarea and
studied [Greek] philosophy and literature, and he returned to Rome and studied the
doctrine of the Church, and he learned by heart the Books of the Old and the New
Testaments in a few years. After this his parents died and they left him exceedingly great
wealth and endless possessions, and he wished to give them all to Christ so that he might
receive it back a hundredfold. He built a great house wherein might be received travelers,
and pilgrims and strangers, and the poor, and the afflicted. And he planted gardens and
made for them storehouses whereto the fruits of the earth might be carried, and those
places, which he made for the poor, and the needy, are called by his name to this day. His
brother was a magistrate of that city and he laid an accusation against him before Honorius,
Emperor of Rome (A.D. 395-423), and said unto him, “Sawiros (Severianus) hath scattered
all his possessions and he saith, I give it to Christ, and I shall received a return therefore
from Him as it is promised in the Holy Gospel.” And these words pleased the emperor,
and he rejoiced in Saint Sawiros (Severianus) and loved him exceedingly. And Honorius
the emperor commanded that Sawiros (Severianus) should neither be separated from him
nor leave the royal palace, and he used to go with him to church always and stand all night
in prayer [with him]. Moreover the righteous Emperor Honorius used to practice the
works of the monks in secret, and to wear next to his body a hair shirt under his royal
apparel. In those days the Archbishop of the city of Rome was Saint Yonakendinos, and it
was revealed unto him by God that Sawiros (Severianus) should be appointed bishop over
many peoples. And he loved him and he honored him exceedingly, and he wished never to
be separated from him; everyone loved him, and Theodosius (II), Emperor of
Constantinople (A.D. 408-450), heard of his fame. And when Sawiros (Severianus) saw
that everyone honored him, he was afraid that his labor would be wasted, and he wanted to
leave that place secretly. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him and commanded
him to go to Debra Gabla and to become the father of the monastery and of many souls.
And having put on the monkish garb he went forth by night, and with him was his disciple
Theodore. And God sent forth a light like unto a wheel, which went before him until he
came to Debra Gabla. And there was there a certain righteous man who was the abbot of
13

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
that monastery, and he learned in a vision concerning the coming of Saint Sawiros
(Severianus). And he went out to him, and welcomed him and embraced him, and told him
how a vision concerning him had appeared unto him, and he marveled greatly. And his
fame arrived in every region, and all the people came to him, and the number of the men
who thronged to him could not be counted. And the Emperor Theodosius sent forth from
him men of position to build monasteries for Saint Sawiros (Severianus). And the angel of
the Lord marked out for them the places wherein they were to build monasteries for him.
And he was the comforter of many souls, and God performed many signs by his hands and
wonders innumerable, and among them was the wonder concerning the daughter of the
governor of Gabla, in whom Satan used to dwell. And Satan said to her father, “If thou
wilt drive away Sawiros (Severianus) from this place I will go out of thy daughter.” And
when the father of the girl heard this word, he rose up and went to Saint Sawiros
(Severianus), and told him what Satan had said to him and asked him to heal his daughter.
And the holy man wrote upon a paper for him these words: “In the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ get thee out of her”; and her father took that paper and carried it to his
daughter, and straightway Satan went forth from her. And again there were gathered
together many people, the Samrawiyan and others. Now they formed a large company,
and they wished to come into the monastery of Saint Sawiros (Severianus) and to pillage
it. And God brought darkness upon them, and they remained for three days and three
nights without seeing anything at all; and they made supplication with many tears to Saint
Sawiros (Severianus), and he dismissed them and they departed. And when any of those
monks who were under his authority fell sick, he prayed over them and healed them, and
he comforted them all and taught them the fear of God until they all became like unto the
angels of God. And there was a bishop of that city whose name was Philotheus, and he
learned from a vision of God that Saint Sawiros (Severianus) would succeed him as
bishop, and he sent letters to all the peoples and commanded them to take Saint Sawiros
(Severianus) and to appoint him bishop, because God had chosen him for this dignity.
Then straightway the righteous Emperors Honorius and Arcadius and their governors, took
Saint Sawiros (Severianus) and appointed him bishop of the city of Gabla, and he fought a
great and strenuous fight for the preservation of his flock and of the peoples. And there
was in that city a certain Jew whose name was Sektor, and he was very learned and boasted
himself of his knowledge of the Law of Moses. This man came to Saint Sawiros
(Severianus) and disputed with him, and he would not listen to one word, which came out
of the mouth of Saint Sawiros (Severianus). After this God appeared unto the holy man in
a vision and informed him that the Jew would become one of the holy and blessed people
of Christ. And when the Jew went to his house he saw during a sleep the places of severe
punishment, and it seemed as if one said unto him, “Look upon these unbelieving Jews, thy
kinsmen, and observe how they and all those who have not believed in Christ, dwell in
severe punishment which shall be for ever.” And on the following day that Jew came to
Saint Sawiros (Severianus) and fell down and did homage at his feet, and asked him to
make him a Christian. And straightway he baptized him with Christian baptism, and his
house and all the men of his city. When all the other Jews heard that their chief had
become a Christian, they believed and were baptized and became Christians, and they
became even as those who were born in the Christian Faith. And Saint Sawiros
(Severianus) entreated some other men who were called Nimontos, now they were
magicians, to enter the Christian Faith, but they would not hearken unto him because they
were puffed up by their magic. Now when a man was coming to them they would scatter
dust in his face, and he would not be able to see anything. And Saint Sawiros (Severianus)
14

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
entreated our Lord Jesus Christ with tears, to bring those men into the Christian Faith.
And God brought upon those men a severe disease, which did not affect anyone among the
Christians, even as He did in the land of Egypt when He brought a plague upon Pharaoh,
and his army, and the Egyptians in the days of old. And the magicians perceived their
error, and that this disease had come upon them because they had not hearkened to Saint
Sawiros (Severianus). And they rose up and came to the saint and became Christians, and
all that city became one pasture. And Satan groaned and cried out like an old man who has
rent his garments, and he said, “Behold, I am in distress in every part of the world. Holy
monks have filled all the country of Egypt from one end to the other, the Archbishop
Yonakendinos dwelleth in the country of Rome, John of the Golden Mouth (Chrysostom)
dwelleth in Constantinople, and this place only was left unto me, and behold Sawiros
(Severianus) hath taken it from me.” And the men of Persia sent a despatch to the
Emperors Honorius and Arcadius, seeking to be their allies in battle, and these righteous
emperors sent the Persian dispatch to Saint Sawiros (Severianus). And when he had read it
he wrote a dispatch to the Emperors Honorius and Arcadius to instruct them [in his views],
and he said unto them, “If we belong to Christ, and if our kingdom belongeth to Christ, we
have no need of armor, or spears, or troops.” And he began to remind them of the signs
which God had wrought for the righteous kings of olden time, and how he had made them
strong and how they had vanquished their enemies. And before the great fast came the
Persians being ashamed departed from them. As concerning John Chrysostom. Having
brought Saint Sawiros (Severianus) with the bishops, the holy man admonished with great
severity the Empress Eudoxia, because of John Chrysostom, for he had done nothing
whatsoever worthy of banishment. And when the empress would not hearken unto him, he
returned to his city and wrote discourses in which he admonished her severely, and these
discourses are read in Orthodox churches unto this day. And Saint Sawiros (Severianus)
waxed old, and his days were one hundred years. Before his departure from the body, at
the tenth [hour] of the day the angel of God appeared unto him, and summoned him to go
forth from this world and from toil into rest. And the holy man ordered his people to
continue to keep the Law of God; then he died and delivered his soul into the hand of his
Creator. His death took place two years after John Chrysostom died, and one year after
Saint Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, died (A.D. 394). When Saint Sawiros (Severianus)
was dead, they prepared his pure body for burial as was meet, and they sang spiritual songs
and laudatory sentences and buried him in a grave.
And on this day also Agathon, Peter, John, Ammon, and Ammona and their mother Rapika
(Rebecca) became holy martyrs. This holy man came from the city of Konya, on the
borders of the district of Kus in Upper Egypt. And our Lord Christ appeared unto them
and informed them what would happen unto them, how they would receive the crown of
martyrdom in the city of Sebra which is near the city of Alexandria, and that they would
take their bodies to the city of Nikreha to the north of the land of Egypt. And the holy men
rejoiced at this vision, and they rose up early in the morning and gave all their possessions
to the poor. Now Agathon their eldest brother was a man of high position in his city, and
everyone loved him, and Rapika (Rebecca) their mother encouraged them and incited them
to bear patiently punishment for the Name of Christ. Then they came to the city of Kus
and confessed Christ before Dionysius the governor, who condemned them to a severe
punishment; and he tortured their mother before them, and she bore the torture bravely and
rejoiced, and then he tortured her five sons. And when he was weary of torturing them
they advised him to send them to the city of Alexandria so that they might not lead astray
the people, for they were held in great affection by all, and many men through them
15

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
believed in Christ and received a crown of martyrdom. And when they had brought the
holy men to Armenius, the governor of the city of Alexandria, now he was in the city
called Sabra, and he learned about their fight, he tortured them very severely. He hacked
their bodies with knives, he cast them into a large vessel and kindled a fire on top of them,
he threw them on to the wheel, and hung them up head downwards. And in all these
tortures our Lord Christ supported them against death until the governor and all his people
were ashamed. Then the governor commanded his men to cut off their heads with a sword,
and to sink their bodies in the sea. And straightway they cut off their heads with a sword,
and they laid their bodies in a small boat so that they might cast them into the sea. And
God sent forthwith an angel to a certain rich man of the city of Nekraha to the north of
Egypt, on the borders of Masil, and commanded him to take the bodies of the saints. And
that rich man went and gave much money to the soldiers, and took the bodies of the holy
saints, and he heard a voice, which said, “This is the abode of the saints.” And he laid
them in the church until the time of tribulation passed by, and then he revealed their
existence; and they built a fine church and laid their bodies therein. And God made
manifest from their bones many great signs and wonders, and recently they translated their
bodies to the city of Samnutya (Samhud in the province of Farshut).
And on this day also Fasiladas and two thousand [of his companions] were martyred.
And on this day also are to be commemorated Das, Gagra, Nawla, Bishop of Antioch, and
Peter the monk.
And on this day also is commemorated the birth of Hanna the mother of our Lady.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 08
(September 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Zacharias the priest, the son of Berachiah, was martyred by the hand of
Herod the king. When the angel Gabriel announced to this priest the birth of John his son,
he did not believe his word. Because of this Gabriel said, “Thou shalt be dumb until the
child is born,” and he was dumb until the child was born; but when he was born, he spoke
and he glorified God, and he wrote and said, “His name is John.” And the Holy Gospel
beareth testimony concerning him, and shows that he and his wife were righteous, and that
they walked in the Law of God without blemish. When our Lord Christ was born, and the
men who were soothsayers came to worship Him, Herod was troubled and feared for his
kingdom. For this reason he sent and slew all the children of Bethlehem of Judah whose
days were two years and less than two years, and Herod thought that among their number
he would kill Christ. And the angel of God appeared unto Joseph in a dream, and he took
our Lord and Mary His mother and they came to the land of Egypt. And the mother of
John took him, and went out into the fields, and fled into the desert of Sina, and she dwelt
there bringing up her child for seven years. Then the mother of the boy died and left her
child alone in the desert, and there he stayed until his showing himself to Israel. When
Herod killed the children he thought in his heart that John was Christ, and he sent his
16

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
lictors to seek for him with his father Zacharias. And Zacharias said unto him, “I know
neither where the boy is nor his mother.” And Herod said unto him, “If thou dost not bring
thy son unto me I myself will slay thee”; but Zacharias was not afraid of him. And Herod
told his soldiers to slay Zacharias, and they slew him between the sanctuary and the altar;
and God hid his body and his blood became like unto stone. And when the priests and the
people were coming to prayer according to their wont, one of the priests arrived and went
into the sanctuary, and he found the blood and he heard a voice which cried out in the altar,
saying, “Zacharias the son of Berachiah hath been slain”; and his blood continued to cry
out until it was avenged. Now this Zacharias, the son of Berachiah, was not one of the
twelve sons of the prophets, for that Zacharias was not killed, but died in the country of
Urati where his body was found in a perfect state and undecayed, and they built a church
for it. As for this holy man Zacharias, [the father of John,] his body was never found, but
his blood became a witness of his slaughter. And it is also said that when Herod slew the
children a certain Jew said unto him, “Behold, a son hath been born unto Zacharias even as
the angel of God told him, peradventure he is Christ.” And Herod sent his lictors to slay
the child John. And Zacharias said unto them, “I have taken the child to a certain place;
come ye with me and take him from that place.” And the lictors went with him until he
brought them into the sanctuary. And he set his son John on the wing of the altar, where
the angel of God had announced [his birth], and immediately the angel of God snatched
away the child, and carried him off to the desert Zifata. And when the lictors could not
find the child they slew Zacharias his father. Therefore did our Lord say unto the Jews,
“The blood of Zacharias whom ye slew shall come upon you,” for it was the Jews who
were the cause of his slaughter.
And on this day also died Moses the prophet and righteous man, and head of the Prophets.
This prophet labored with the people of God, and he suffered tribulation with them until
[his] death and he delivered up his soul. This man it was who worked signs and wonders
in Egypt and in the sea ‘Eritrea (Red Sea), and he was not well pleased to be called the
“son of Pharaoh’s daughter,” who brought him up, when his parents had cast him into the
river of Egypt because of the decree of Pharaoh who commanded that all the male children
of the Hebrews should be destroyed. When the daughter of Pharaoh the king found him
she took him and reared him as if he had been her own son. And when he was fully forty
years old he saw an Egyptian slay one of the Hebrews, and straightway he avenged the
Hebrew and slew the Egyptian. On the following day he saw two other men fighting
together, and he attempted to make peace between them. And he who was in the wrong
rose up and said unto him, “Dost thou wish to slay me as thou didst slay the Egyptian
yesterday?” And because of this Moses fled to the land of Midian and there he married a
wife and begot two sons. When he was eighty years old there appeared unto him a vision
and a fire in the Patos tree, and when he came to look and to learn [what it was], God
spoke unto him from out of the tree, and commanded him to depart to Egypt, and to bring
out the Children of Israel from there. Then God worked ten plagues with His own hands
upon the Egyptians; the first was the river, which became blood, and the last was the
slaughter of the first born of the Egyptians. After this He brought the people out of the
land of Egypt, and He divided the sea ‘Eritrea (Red Sea) and made them to pass through it,
and He brought back the water of the sea over their enemies, Pharaoh and his host, and
drowned them in the sea ‘Eritrea (Red Sea). And He brought down for them “Manna” in
the Arabian Desert forty years, and He made water to flow forth from a rock; all these
beautiful things did Moses the prophet perform for them. And they used to curse him, and
many times they wished to stone him, but he was longsuffering with them, and he prayed
17

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to God for them, and because he loved them greatly he said unto God, “If Thou wilt not
forgive this people their transgression, then blot out my name from Thy book” (Exodus
xxxii, 32). And the Book is a witness concerning him - that he spoke with God five
hundred [times], and the words testify [that God talked with him] as a man talketh with his
friend. And his face shone with the light of the glory of God, and he was obliged to veil
his face so that the children of Israel might not die when they looked upon it. When he
was fully one hundred and twenty years old God commanded him to deliver the people
over into the hand of Joshua, the son of Nun, his disciple, that he might shepherd them.
And he called Joshua and commanded him with the command of God and the Law, and he
delivered the people into his hand, and informed him that he was to bring the people into
the land of [their] inheritance. And after Moses had made the Tabernacle of Witness and
everything which was in it by the command of God, he died in the mountain and was
buried there, and God hid his body so that the children of Israel should not take it and
worship it. And the Book testifieth among the children of Israel there never rose up a
prophet who was like unto Moses. When Satan wished to uncover (or reveal) the body of
Moses, Michael the archangel rebuked him, and prevented him from doing so, even as
Jude the apostle testifieth in the book of the apostle (verse 9). And the children of Israel
mourned for Moses three days.
And on this day also Dimasyos (Dimasius) became a martyr. This holy man was from the
city of Derseba on the borders of Dantu to the north of the land of Egypt, he loved the
Church, and the poor, and he visited the sick. And a man who was shining with light
appeared unto him and commanded him to go and receive the crown of martyrdom, and he
made covenants with heaven and rejoiced greatly. And he forsook his father and went
forth from his city, and he prayed to God to give him help during the torture for His holy
Name’s sake. And he came into the city of Athribis and confessed Christ before the
governor, who tortured him severely and sent him to Lucianus the governor of the city of
Alexandria. And whilst he was in the boat, our Lord Christ appeared unto him, and
comforted him, and encouraged him, and promised him everlasting happiness; and his soul
rejoiced and was exceedingly glad. And Lucianus tortured him very severely and then cut
off his head with a sword; thus Dimasius received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom
of heaven. And the people of his city came and took away his body, and paid great honors
to it, and through it signs and mighty wonders took place.
And on this day also are commemorated: Lucianus the martyr, ‘Ermeyas (Jeremiah), and
the nobles ‘Andewa and ‘Elyanos, and ‘Ammon the monk.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 09
(September 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy father Abba Bishora (Pisoura), Bishop of the city of Masil (the Meledj
of the Copts and Metelis of the Greeks), became a martyr. This holy man became Bishop
of the city of Masil, which is beloved of God, of the country of Egypt. When Diocletian
18

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
was reigning and was persecuting the Christians, this holy man wished to pour out his
blood for Christ’s sake. And he gathered together all the people, and set them before the
Holy Offering, and taught them many righteous ordinances, and after this he informed
them that he wished to pour out his blood for Christ’s sake. And they all, both great and
small, wept, and said unto him, “What aileth thee that thou wouldst leave us? We are thy
pupils; we will not permit thee to depart.” And they wished to prevent him, but they could
not prevail upon him [to stay], and they allowed him [to depart]. And he committed them
to Christ, and he embraced them, and he went out from them, and they set him on his way
weeping bitterly as they went. And three bishops went with him, who were Baskos and
Fenabikos and Theodore. And they went together to the city of the governor, and they
confessed Christ before him, and he tortured them cruelly and multiplied their
punishments. And when he knew that those bishops were the parents of Christians, now
the bishops were bold and endured the tortures with great fortitude, for our Lord Christ
confirmed them, the governor ordered [his men] to cut off the heads of the three bishops.
And they cut off their heads with a sword, and they received their crowns of life in the
kingdom of the heavens. And the holy body of Bishora (Pisoura) resteth to this day in the
city of Nasel on the other side of the river.
And on this day Fasiledes and 14,730 men and 7 women were martyred [with Fasiledes].
And on this day also is commemorated the miracle which took place in the city of Frumya
in the country of Rome. This man, like the people from the country of the Greeks, was
fired excessively with devilish envy of the signs and wonders, which used to appear in the
church of the glorious angel Michael, the captain of the hosts of heaven. And they wished
to turn the stream of water from the Nile, which flowed through the district on to the
church, so that they might submerge it, and destroy the sacristan who had it in charge.
And straightway Michael the captain of the heavenly hosts, the divine angel, appeared unto
Nartinos, the sacristan of the church, and he drew nigh unto him, and said unto him, “Be
strong, and fear not.” And he smote a rock with the staff, which was in his hand, and the
rock was split open like a window, and the stream of water flowed out through it. And
those who saw this marveled and praised God, and paid honor to Michael the archangel.
And from that day to this that stream of water can be seen flowing through the rock, and
not approaching in any way the church of the Archangel Michael.
And on this day also died King Yasay (Yusyas, who lived in the eighteenth century) who
finished his fight on a tree, and pleased God.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 10
(September 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day was revealed the miracle of our Lady Mary in the city of Sedenya when oil
dropped from the tablet with her portrait [painted] upon it as if it had been clothed with
flesh. Now, it is said that Luke the evangelist painted this portrait. And the cause of its
coming to Sedenya was a certain widow whose name was Martha, and who turned her
19

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
house into a habitation for pilgrims; and she loved our Lady Mary exceedingly, and
ministered unto her with all her power. One day there lodged with her a certain righteous
monk whose name was Theodore, and she received him with joy. And on the following
day when she was bidding him farewell, she said unto him, “Whither goest thou, O
father?” And he said unto her, “I go to worship in the Sanctuary in Jerusalem.” And she
said unto him, “Take a little money from me to buy me a picture of our Lady Mary, and
bring it to me when thou returnest to me”; and he said unto her, “I will buy [a picture] with
my own money, and bring it to thee.” And when he had arrived in Jerusalem he knelt and
prayed in the holy places, and he set out on his return journey without having bought the
picture. And immediately he heard a voice, which said unto him, “Why hast thou
forgotten to buy the picture?” And being troubled by the voice he turned back into the
marketplace, and found a picture of our Lady Mary, which had sweet features and a
beautiful form. Having bought it he wrapped it up in cotton and in fine linen. And as he
was traveling along a terrible road in the desert thieves rose up against him, and when he
was wishing to take to flight, a voice came forth from that picture which said, “Fear not:
complete thy journey”; and he went on his way and none challenged him. Another time a
savage lion rose up against him and wanted to rend him, and straightway an awful voice
came forth from that picture and drove away the lion. And when Theodore saw all these
signs and wonders, he wanted to carry that picture and drove away the lion. And when
Theodore saw all these signs and wonders, he wanted to carry that picture to his own city,
and he did not wish to give it to the widow. And as he was traveling by boat on another
journey, the wind rose up against him and carried him towards Damascus. And having
disembarked he went into the house of that widow with several other pilgrims, and he did
not discover himself to her, and she did not know him. And on the following day when he
wished to go forth secretly and to depart to his city, the gates of the house failed to work
and they remained jammed throughout the day; in the evening the monk returned to his
abode, and when the widow saw him she wondered. And he continued to do this for three
days, returning each evening; he saw the gate, but when he wished to go through it, he was
unable to go on his way. Then the widow took him and said unto him, “O my father, what
aileth thee? Is thine heart troubled that I see thee thus disturbed?” And then he told her
everything that had come upon him in the matter of the picture. And straightway she
brought him into her house, and she opened the wrappings of the picture and found that
drops of sweat were falling from it; and by reason of her joy she kissed the hands and feet
of the monk. Then she took the picture into her prayer-chamber, and laid it upon a stand in
a recess with great honors. And she made for it a brass grating, so that no one could touch
it, and she hung before it lamps which burned by day and by night, and outside these she
hung silken curtains. Beneath the picture she set a marble bowl into which the drops of oil,
which sweated out from it, might be collected. And that monk dwelt with the widow, and
ministered to the picture of our Lady Mary until they both died. And when the archbishop
of that city heard the report of the picture, he, and the bishops and the priests and all the
people came [to the house], and when they looked at the tablet with the picture they found
that it was in the condition of being covered with flesh; and they marveled at this divine
work. And having emptied out the oil from the bowl, and divided it among themselves as
a blessed thing, the bowl filled up [again] immediately. When they attempted to remove
the picture to another spot a great earthquake took place, and many people died; and the
picture remaineth there until this day.

20

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day died Judith the prophetess, who delivered Israel from the hand of
Holophernes, the evil one, through the wisdom and counsel which she employed until at
length she cut off his head by the might of God which was upon her.
And on this day also the birth of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, took place according to
what is written in the Book of Exposition of Saint Abba Macarius of Debra Skete (the
monastery of Scete). And it is also written in the Holy Scriptures. On the thirteenth day of
the month Tahsas (Dec. 7), the righteous woman Hanna, the mother of our holy Lady, the
Virgin Mary, conceived, and her bringing forth took place on the first day of Maskaram
(Sept. 8--Oct. 7). And it is found in other books that on the seventh day of the month of
Nehase (August), God sent the angel Gabriel to the righteous Joachim and told him,
saying, “Thy wife Hanna shall be with child.” And immediately she had union with her
husband Joachim she conceived, and she brought forth on the first day of the month
Genbot (May 9 - June 7). And it is meet that we should commemorate the festival of the
birth of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary on both of them, because she maketh intercession
for us to her beloved Son at all times, and behold, we will write the commemoration of her
birth on the first day of the month Genbot. May her intercession be with us. Amen.
And on this day also the Matronya became a martyr. This holy woman was handmaiden to
a Jewish woman, and she was a Christian even as her parents were Christians. And that
Jewish woman her mistress hated [Christianity], and she wished to make her maid abandon
the Christian Religion, and to bring her over to the Jewish Faith, which she would not
embrace. For this reason she reviled Matronya and made her service heavy upon her. One
day Matronya followed her mistress the Jewish lady until she brought her to the Jewish
synagogue, and Matronya turned aside and went into the holy church. And when her
mistress asked her, saying, “Why didst thou not come into my synagogue?” The holy
Matronya answered and said unto her, “God is very remote from thy synagogue, and how
would it be seemly for me to enter therein? But the place which is seemly for me to enter
is the holy church, which our Lord Jesus Christ purchased with his precious blood.” When
he mistress heard these words she was wroth with her and beat her severely, and shut her
up in a dark place wherein she remained for four days without food and drink; then the
Jewess had her brought out from her prison and beat her cruelly with many, many stripes,
and once again she sent her back into the prison, where she died. And after her death her
mistress took her body, and carried it up to the roof of her house, and according to what the
men say who saw her, she cast it out, and it fell down by itself. Now the mistress of
Matronya was afraid of the Government, and alarmed lest they should examine her about
her murder. And the wrath of God fell upon that Jewish woman, and as she was coming
down from the roof of her house, she fell down headlong, and died, and departed into fire
forever. And this holy woman Matronya went to joy everlasting.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Athanasia and her three children.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

21

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 11
(September 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Fasiladas (Basilides), the father of the kings of Antioch and their counselor,
became a martyr. This holy man was a general of the kings of Rom, and the whole
kingdom stood by reason of his counsel; and he had many slaves and handmaidens. There
was a certain prince in Rom in those days whose name was Numerianus [son of the
Emperor Carus], and he married a sister of Saint Fasiladas (Basilides), a lady of high rank,
the mother of Theodore Banadelewos. And by him she became the mother of Justus, and
Claudius, and ‘Abadir. These were the sons of the sister of Saint Fasiladas (Basilides),
who was the sister of the mother of Victor. And Fasiladas (Basilides) begot by her two
sons, one whose name was ‘Awsabyos (Eusebius) and the other was [called] Macarius.
And at that time the men of Kuez and Persia were at war with Rom [about A.D. 283], and
they sent Justus, the son of the king, and ‘Awsabyos (Eusebius), the son of Fasiladas
(Basilides), with their armies, and they went to the war. And Numerianus the prince went
to fight against the other [enemies], who slew that king in that war. Thus the kingdom of
Rom was without a king to rule it and to administer the affairs thereof. At that time the
men of Rom gathered together large numbers of mighty men of war from every city into
their army. And among them was a certain man whose name was ‘Agripada, and who was
a native of Upper Egypt, and a goat-herd. And the Government took him and set him over
the royal horses, and he was bold in character and a mighty man in action. And one of the
daughters of prince Numerianus saw him from a window of the royal palace, and she loved
him and lusted for that ‘Agripada, and she took him and married him, and made him king,
and called him “Diocletian.” And after a few days he forsook the Lord God, the God of
heaven, and worshipped idols. And when Fasiladas (Basilides) heard this thing, he was
very sorry, and he did not return to reign in his kingdom. And Justus, the son of
Numerianus, and ‘Awsabyos (Eusebius), the son of Fasiladas (Basilides), returned from
the war with great joy, for they had slain all their enemies, and had lain waste their
countries. When they arrived in the city of Antioch and found that Diocletian, the denier
of Christ, and the worshipper of idols was king, they were exceedingly sorry. And they
drew their swords and wished to slay Diocletian the king, and to appoint king Justus, the
son of Numerianus, but Fasiladas (Basilides) kept them from this act. After this Saint
Fasiladas (Basilides) gathered together all his kinsfolk, and his soldiers, and his slaves, and
informed them that he wished to pour out his blood for the sake of Christ’s Name; and they
all said unto him, “The death which thou diest we also will die with thee.” And they all
agreed together and stood before King Diocletian, who feared them with a very great fear,
for they belonged to the kingdom (i.e. the royal family). And Herminius the father of
Victor advised him to banish them to the country of Egypt, and to punish them there. And
he sent them all away, each to a different city, namely ‘Abadir, and ‘Ira’I, the sister of
‘Awsabyos (Eusebius), and Macarius, the brother of Claudius, and Victor. Theodore
Banadelewos he hung upon a komol tree, and drove one hundred and fifty-three nails
through his body, and thus Theodore consummated his martyrdom. Fasiladas (Basilides)
he sent to a city of ‘Afrakya, of Five Cities (Pentopolis) to Masrus the governor; and when
Masrus saw him he marveled exceedingly why he had left his kingdom and his glory. And
our Lord Christ sent His angel and lifted him up by the spirit into heaven and showed him
the spiritual habitation; and his soul rejoiced exceedingly. Of his slaves, some he set free,
22

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and some received the crown of martyrdom with him; now the number of the latter was
7033. And [Diocletian] tortured the holy man on the rack, and they cut his body into
pieces with sharpened rods of iron, and he died; but our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be
glory, raised him up from the dead whole and uninjured. And when all the people who
dwelt there saw this, they marveled exceedingly, and they believed in our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory, and they cursed the governor. And the governor was wroth with
them, and he commanded his soldiers to cut off their heads, and they cut off their heads
with the sword, and they received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven; and the
number of these was 5700 men and 37 women. Then they threw Fasiladas (Basilides) into
a frying pan and roasted him, and he became like water, and his whole body was melted.
And the governor commanded them to dig a deep pit on the mountaintop, and to bury him
therein, and they did so; and straightway our Lord Christ, to Whom be glory, raised him up
from the dead a second time. And Fasiladas (Basilides) came once again before the
governor, and he cried out and said, “Be ashamed, O governor Masrus, thou infidel king,
and let thy idols be ashamed with thee! For behold, my Lord Jesus Christ hath raised me
up from the dead, whole and uninjured.” And when the people who were there saw this
miracle, they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ and became martyrs, and they were in
number 2300. Then the king made Saint Fasiladas (Basilides) to go up upon a machine
with wheels and a saw inside it, and he inflicted severe tortures upon him, and then he
made him to lie on his liver upon an iron bed, and had a fire lighted under him. And
straightway our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory, appeared unto him, and raised him
up from the torture, and made him whole and uninjured. He made him a promise, and said
unto him, “O my chosen one Fasiladas (Basilides), know thou that everyone who shall
celebrate thy commemoration, or shall give alms to the poor for thy name’s sake, or shall
give clothing to the naked, or shall give incense to the church for thy commemoration, and
everyone who shall celebrate thy commemoration, whether in little or whether in much, to
all these will I give remission of sins, and I will make their habitation to be with Me in the
kingdom of heaven.” And having said this unto him, our Lord went up into heaven in
great glory. When Saint Fasiladas (Basilides) heard this from our Lord he rejoiced with
great joy. Then Masrus the governor took counsel with his advisers, and said unto them,
“What shall I do about this man whose name is Fasiladas (Basilides)? I have no other
torture left which I can apply to him, and he will not turn from his opinion.” And they
counseled him and said unto him, “Cut off his head with the sword, and be quit of him, for
behold, all the men of the city were being corrupted through him.” And straightway the
governor commanded his men to cut off the head of Saint Fasiladas (Basilides), and they
cut off his head, and he received a crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven in the
place of the earthly kingdom, which he had cast aside and forsaken. And signs and great
wonders were made manifest through his body. Now the number of all those who became
martyrs with him was 5793. May their blessing and prayer be with us. Amen.
And on this day also the holy woman Banafzez [literally “violet”], the interpretation
whereof is, “Whose odor is sweet,” became a martyr. This holy woman was old and very
far advanced in years, and she fought her fight in the days of Sabor, King of Persia; they
carried her away bound into captivity together with nine thousand Christians whom they
had captured. The general of the army first tortured her very severely and then cut off her
head, the blood, which flowed from her neck, spurted out a very long way. And the
strength of [her] enemies, that is to say the soldiers who dwelt there, drooped, and the light
of the sun was turned to darkness, and the odor of a very sweet smell filled the place.
23

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also three husbandmen of the city of ‘Asni [in Upper Egypt], whose names
were Sures and ‘Ankityos and Mashadra, were martyred. When Arianus was returning
towards the north he slew all the people everywhere and spared no one, and at length his
soldiers were exhausted and they put back their swords into their sheaths. And these three
holy husbandmen met him on the bridge (ferry) on their way back from the field, and they
cried out and said unto him boldly, “We are Christians.” And when Arianus heard them,
he said unto his officers, “Hear ye these men? Do ye wish to kill them?” And his soldiers
said unto him, “We are weary, and we have put back our swords into their sheaths.” And
when the holy men heard them they said unto him, “Behold, here are our digging tools, kill
us with them.” Then they laid their heads down on a stone, and the soldiers hacked
through their necks.
And on this day also is the commemoration of the blessed Cornelius, a general and
righteous man. He lived in the days of the holy Apostles, and he fought the good fight
strenuously, and was well pleasing unto God. And an angel appeared unto him and
commanded him to send men to invite Peter the apostle to come to him, so that he might
hear from him what was right. And when Peter the apostle came to him he told him, and
all those who were with him, the word of our Lord Jesus Christ; and Cornelius believed,
and he and all his house were baptized; and Peter the apostle appointed him to the Church
of Alexandria. And when he arrived there he found [the city] filled with the worship of
idols, and he baptized many of the men thereof and baptized them with Christian baptism.
And Demetrius the governor believed, and Cornelius baptized him and all the people of his
house with Christian baptism. And he passed his whole life in fighting like the Apostles,
and he was the first of the Gentiles who believed [on Christ].
And on this day also died Saint Theodora. This holy woman was a native of Alexandria,
and she lived in the days of Zeno the emperor; a strange man forced her, and also took her
handmaiden and defiled her. And straightway she sorrowed with a bitter sorrow, and wept
bitter tears. And she put on male attire secretly, and went forth from the city of Alexandria
in the guise of a man, and she called herself Theodore. Then she went to a monastery of
monks, and arrayed herself in the garb of the monks, which is the garb of angels, and all
those who saw her thought that she was a eunuch. And she devoted herself to the ascetic
life, and fought a most strenuous fight, and she endured thirst, and hunger, and the
weariness of night vigil, and the standing up by day; and she continued to lead this life for
many years. Now a certain man committed fornication with a certain woman, and she
conceived by him and brought forth a child; and her parents said unto her, “Who is it that
hath defiled thy virginity?” And she uttered a lie against this holy woman Theodora, and
said, “It is Theodore the monk who liveth in the monastery that hath defiled me, and I am
with child by him.” And when her parents heard these words they were exceedingly sorry,
and they took the child and carried him to the abbot of the monastery, and said unto him,
“Take this child, for he is the son of Theodore the monk, thy son.” And the abbot
summoned this holy woman, and said unto him (sic), “Why hast thou done this abominable
thing, and brought shame and disgrace upon the whole community of monks?” Now he
did not know that it was a woman to whom he spoke. And the holy woman Theodora said
unto him, “I have sinned. Have mercy upon me, O my father.” And straightway the abbot
was wroth, and he gave her the child, and expelled her from the monastery; and she dwelt
in the desert seven years, and the child was with her. And she endured many trials and
tribulations caused by devils, and Satan tortured her cruelly. After this she was received,
and one brought her into the monastery again, where she lingered a few days and then died,
24

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and delivered her soul into the hand of God. And she received life everlasting with all the
saints, and she finished a good fight.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Basil the martyr, Theodore, Bishop of
Jerusalem, Kawestos, the chief of the martyrs of the city of Alexandria, and those who
were martyred with him.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 12
(September 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the glorious angel Michael the archangel. On this day God,
to Whom be glory, sent him to Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amos, and He had mercy
upon him, and showed compassion unto him after He had been wroth with him for twentyeight years. And God commanded him to go to Hezekiah the king, and to tell him that
God would heal him of his sickness, and had added fifteen years to his days, so that he
might marry and beget Manasseh.
And on this day took place the General Council of the Saints, two hundred bishops, in the
city of Ephesus. This was the third of the great General Councils, and its bishops
assembled in the twentieth year of the reign of Theodosius the Less, and son of Arcadius,
the son of Thodosius the Great. They assembled because of the error of Nestor (Nestorius)
who was Archbishop of Constantinople, and who said, “Our Lady, the Virgin Mary, did
not give birth to God in the flesh, but to a mere man, and that afterwards the Son of God
dwelt in him, and not that He dwelt and was one with him, but that He dwelt [in him]
according to his desire and pleasure only; therefore Christ had Two Natures and Two
Existences.” This is the wicked belief of Nestorius the infidel. Because of him these
fathers, two hundred bishops, were convened, and they debated the matter with him, and
they urged strongly and showed him that He Who was born of our holy Lady Mary the
Virgin, was God Who had become man. And they brought before him the testimony of the
words of the angel Gabriel when he said unto our Lady Mary in the holy Gospel of Saint
Luke (1:28), “God be with thee! He Who shall be born of thee is holy and shall be called
the son of the Most High.” And they brought before him also the words of Isaiah (vii, 14)
the prophet in his prophecy, “Behold a virgin shall conceive, and she shall bear a son, and
his name shall be called Emmanuel.” And again he saith, “There shall go forth from Jesse
a root, and he who shall arise from it shall be the hope of the Gentiles” (Isaiah xi, 1, 10).
And moreover, our father Saint Cyril, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, rebuked him,
and admonished him, and said unto him, “Natures cannot be separated after they have
become one in their unity, on the contrary, and we believe and declare that the Word of
God that became man is One Nature only.” And Nestorius the unbeliever would not
believe this, and he would not turn from his unbelief, and the whole General Council
rebuked him and threatened him that they would cut him off from his priesthood and office
unless he turned from his evil counsel. And he would neither hearken now accept the
words of the whole Council, and they therefore cut him off from his priesthood, and they
25

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
anathematized him, and excommunicated him, and drove him forth from the Council into
Upper Egypt, where he died an evil death and departed into Sheol for ever. And these
fathers, the two hundred bishops, confirmed the belief and made known in writing the
declaration of this Council, and they said, “Our Lady Mary, the holy Virgin, the Godbearer, brought forth the Word of God made flesh.” And they drew up the Canon and laid
down the Law, and they signed it with their own hands, and gave it to the faithful unto this
day. And if it be said that in these days the Nestorians do not believe in the faith of
Nestorius, the unbeliever, we reply that this is due to the fact that the Nestorians have
mingled with the Jacobites who are in Syria, and in the country of the East generally, and
that some of them have turned from their evil counsel. And we will beseech God to guide
us in the way of salvation - to Whom be praise and glory forever and ever! Amen.
Salutation to ‘Aflahos the martyr, and to those who were martyred with him.
And on this day also is commemorated the translation of the bodies of Saint ‘Aflahos the
martyr and his companions in the city of Alexandria.
And on this day also are commemorated Luras (Luyuras) and Galanicus (Calanicus) the
martyrs, and Joachim and Hanna, and on it a festival is held in Rome in honor of Stephen
(protomartyr).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 13
(September 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the miracle which the great Saint Abba Basil, Bishop of
Caesarea and Cappadocia, wrought in connection with the young man who lusted for his
master’s daughter, and whose heart was inflamed with love and desire for her. And that
young man went to Satan, the enemy of our race, by the help of an unbeliever and
magician. And that denier of Christ wrote a paper and gave it to him, and commanded him
to go to the cemetery of the Pagans and to stand up by one of the graves therein at the time
of midnight, and to lift up on high his [right] hand with that paper in it. And this vile man
having received these words from him, went and stood up among the graves of the Pagans,
with the paper in his hand, according as the magician had directed him. And straightway
there came to him one of the Satans who seized his hand and brought him to Satan, the
chief of the Satans, and he took that paper out of his hand. And Satan asked him, saying,
“Dost thou believe on me, O young man? And wilt thou deny thy Messiah and not turn
again to Him after I have fulfilled for thee thy desire?” And the poor slave answered and
said unto him, “Yea, my lord, I will do as thou commandest me.” And Diabolos, the crafty
deceiver, said unto him, “Write with thine own hand on a piece of paper that thou wilt do
this.” And the young man wrote for him on the paper, and denied Christ our God, and he
believed on Satan our enemy, and he separated himself from Christ in the body after he
had been one with Him in heart and soul. And then Satan kindled lust in the heart of the
daughter of the slave’s master, and she loved the young man exceedingly. And she could
not bear to be away from him for a moment, but she cried out boldly to her father, saying,
26

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
“If thou wilt not give me in marriage to thy servant, then assuredly I will kill myself.” And
her father was sorrowful and wept bitterly because of this thing, and he tried to make her to
be patient, but she could not be patient, and moreover, her love for the man was increasing
continually in her heart. And she overcame her father, because he was afraid that she
would kill herself, being ashamed before the people. And her father gave her to the young
man, and he received the maiden from her father, and he took her into his house, and he
satisfied his desire of her. And after she had dwelt with him many days, her father and her
mother multiplied their weeping and lamentation for her, and her father cried out to God
beseeching Him to have compassion upon them, and to remove their sorrow. And our
Lord Jesus Christ heard their cry, and accepted their petition, and He made their daughter
to know, and made it clear to her that the young man whom she loved was not a Christian.
And on the one occasion during the whole of the time which he had lived with her, when
he went into the church, she saw that he did not partake of the Holy Mysteries and that he
did not make the sign of the life-giving Cross over himself; and the maiden wept, and
repented and was exceedingly sorry. And when the young man knew that his matter was
revealed unto her plainly, he said unto her, “I have not done any evil whatsoever.” And
she answered and said unto him, “If thou art a Christian, and if what thou sayest is true,
come with me and we will go and enter the church together, and we will received the Holy
Mysteries.” And having forced him he told her of all that he had done for her sake, and
how he had gone to that magician and written that paper for him with his own hand, and
how he had denied Christ and believed on Satan, and had written that paper for him with
his own hand, and had given it to Satan. When the maiden heard this thing from him she
was exceedingly sorry and rebuked herself. And straightway she rose up and made haste
to go to that pillar and light of the church, Saint Basil, bishop of her city, and she told him
what had happened unto her, and she wept and did homage at his feet, and entreated him to
deliver and save her. And Saint Basil sent and had the young man brought to him, and he
learned from him his affair, and the young man revealed unto him what he had done. Then
Saint Basil asked him, saying, “Dost thou wish to return and to be a Christian once more?”
And the young man answered and said unto him with tears, “Is it possible for this to
happen unto me, my lord?” And the saint said unto him, “Be of good cheer, and fear not,”
and he made the sign of the Cross over him, and he shut him up in a chamber near him,
and commanded him to pray until the third day; and Basil went and prayed for him. And
after the third day Basil visited him, and he said unto him, “What hath happened unto thee
during the past three days?” And the young man made known unto him that he had been
in very great tribulation, which was caused by the cries of Satans, who showed him the
paper, which he had written and were very wroth with him. And Saint Basil said unto him,
“Be not afraid of them, for God will help thee, and strengthen thee, and preserve thee.”
And Saint Basil gave him bread and water, and took him back into the place of his
confinement, and prayed over him again. Later he visited him again, and he said unto him,
“What hath happened unto thee?” And the young man said, “I hear their cry, but I see
them not.” And again Saint Basil gave him bread and water, and admonished him and
rebuked him, and said unto him, “Be not afraid”; then Basil took him back again into his
place of confinement, and went away and prayed for him. Now Saint Basil shut him up in
this way for three days at a time, and visited him every third day for forty days. And when
the saint visited him at the completion of the forty days he asked the young man what had
happened to him. And the young man said unto him, “O my holy father, last night I saw
thee waging war against Satan on my behalf, and thou didst vanquish him straightway”;
and when Saint Basil heard these words from him he rejoiced exceedingly. And he
27

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
summoned all the monks from the monasteries, and the priests, and they prayed for that
young man all that night. On the following day he brought the young man to the church,
and the people of that city came there also, and Saint Basil commanded them all to lift up
their hands to heaven, and to pray and to make entreaty to God and say, “Have mercy upon
us”; and they did as he commanded them. And they continued to cry out and to say, “Lord
have mercy upon us,” until that writing which the young man had written with his own
hand for Satan fell down; and it fell down in the presence of all the people. And Saint
Basil unrolled the paper and read it before all the people, and he blessed the young man
and gave him the Holy Mysteries. And he took the woman and blessed them together, and
they departed to their house rejoicing and exulting in their salvation, and in the remission
of their sins. And they praised God and ascribed thanks to Saint Basil who by his prayer
had saved them from the error of Satan.
And on this day also Abba Isaac the anchorite became a martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 14
(September 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Agathon of the pillar. This holy man came from the
city of Tenis (Tanis, or the Field of Zoan, i.e. San Al-Hagar) in the north of the land of
Egypt. His parents were righteous folk, and fearers of God, and they loved to give alms
and gifts to the poor and needy. The thoughts of his mind tended to monasticism, and they
moved in his heart continually. The name of his father was Matra, and the name of his
mother was Marya. When he was thirty-five years old he was appointed priest, and
straightway he devoted himself continually to the Church. And he entreated God by day
and by night to make straight for him his departure from this world, and he departed to the
desert and became a monk. And the Lord Christ prepared the means for him, and he went
out from his city, and came to the city of Mareotis, and thence he departed to the Scete
desert. And the angel of God appeared unto him in the form of a monk who journeyed
about with him everywhere in the desert and brought him to the monastery of Saint Abba
Macarius in Scete. And Saint Abba Agathon came to the holy elders Abba Abraham and
Abba Ga’Argi, and he became their disciple and lived with them for three years. After this
they set him before the sanctuary and before the abbot, Abba John, and they remained
three days in prayer over his garb of monasticism, and they arrayed him in the garb of
angels. From that hour he became a devotee of God, and he fought a great fight with
fasting and prayer, continually, day and night; and he slept on the ground without a
mattress, and at length the skin of his body clave to his bones. And he read continually the
history of the striving of Abba Simon of the pillar (Simon Stylites), and he was always
envious of his striving. And he meditated in his heart, shutting himself up, and he took
counsel with the holy fathers concerning it, and they said this counsel is good; and he was
blessed by them and they prayed over him. And he went out of the desert, and came nigh
unto the world, to the city of Saka (i.e. Sakha, in the province of Gharbiyah), and he dwelt
in a little church. And the believers built him a pillar there, and he went up on it and stood
28

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
on it, and labored strenuously in the ascetic life for a space of fifty years. In his days there
appeared a man in whom was a filthy Satan and who led many people astray. And that
man dwelt in a church, and the people used to throng about him to hear his doctrine, and
with them they carried branches of trees. And Abba Agathon sent and had him brought to
him, and he prayed over him, and drove out from him the devil who used to address the
people through him. Similarly, a certain woman used to say, “Minas the martyr holdeth
converse with me.” And she commanded her followers, and they dug a pool of water in
the name of Abba Minas the martyr, and [pretended that] all those who bathed therein were
healed. And Saint Abba Agathon prayed over that woman until he cast out from her that
unclean spirit. And Saint Abba Agathon commanded the men of that city to fill up that
pool. And there was also another man who used to raise up those who were mad and who
were possessed of the devil, and when he beat them the devil used to leave them for a short
time; and very many of those who were possessed of devils gathered together to him. And
Saint Abba Agathon sent messages to him very often bidding him to come to him, and he
would not obey him and neither came to him nor forsook his error. And when the
governor of that city passed by, those who were possessed of devils cursed him, and for
this reason the governor took that man, and punished him with exceedingly great severity,
and he died straightway during his punishment. And another man, a priest, fell into
fornication with a woman in the church, and polluted (or destroyed) his portion of it; and
the people took him and brought him to Saint Abba Agathon, and he prayed over him and
God healed him. And the holy man commanded that priest to take good heed that he did
not minister in the priesthood during all the remaining days of his life. And the holy man
Agathon worked many miracles, and he healed very many sick people. And there
appeared unto him in the forms of angels very many Satans who sang unto him very sweet
songs, and ascribed blessing to him, but by the might of Christ, to Whom be praise, he
knew their guile, and he made over them the sign of the Glorious Cross, and they fled from
before him speedily. And when God wished to make him to rest from the toil of this
world, Agathon fell sick of a slight illness, and he delivered up his soul into the hand of
God. Now very many people used to gather together to him, and he would teach them the
way of God and would heal them of their sicknesses through his prayers. When they found
out that he was dead they wept bitterly because they had lost their father who was wont to
comfort them, and because they were the orphans of this glorious father. Now all the days
of the life of this holy man Abba Agathon were one hundred years. He dwelt in the world
forty years, and in the desert ten years, and he toiled in ascetic labors and lived upon a
pillar for fifty years.
And on this day also are commemorated Makari (Macarius) the martyr, and Bartholomew,
and ‘Awedra, and Nasen (Naso), and Degana the priest.
And on this day also died Abba Degana the priest.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

29

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 15
(September 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the translation of the body of Saint Stephen the archdeacon and protomartyr
took place. And how did the translation take place? It took place after very many years
had passed since his death, and more than three hundred years after the reign of the
righteous Emperor Constantine who worshipped God nobly, and after the revelation of the
Right Faith. There was a certain man who lived in the garden, which was nigh unto the
place where the body of Saint Stephen was, and that garden was called the “garden of
Gamaliel,” and was nigh unto Jerusalem; and the name of that man was Lucianus. And
Saint Stephen the fighter appeared unto him several times in dreams, and said unto him, “I
am Stephen,” and he informed him that his body was buried in that place; and that man
Lucianus went and told the bishop of the city of Jerusalem, and when the bishop heard this
thing he rejoiced exceedingly. And he rose up straightway and took with him two bishops,
and certain men of the church, and they came to the place wherein the body of the saint
lay, and they dug into the ground there. And a mighty earthquake took place, and the
coffin wherein was the body of the holy man was revealed. And there ascended from it an
odor, which was exceedingly sweet, and they heard the voices of angels praising God and
saying, “Glory to God in the heavens, and peace upon earth, His good pleasure to men.”
And they praised and sang in this wise three times. And the bishops and the priests bowed
down before the coffin containing the body of the holy man, and then they bore it away
with songs and hymns and many brightly shining lamps until they brought it into the
citadel of Zion. And after this, a certain man whose name was Alexander, and who was a
native of Constantinople, and who lived in Jerusalem, built a beautiful church of Saint
Stephen, and he removed the body of Saint Stephen into it. Five years after this Alexander
died, and his wife buried him by the side of the coffin of Saint Stephen. And when eight
yeas more had passed the wife of Alexander decided to go to the city of Constantinople
and to take the body of her husband with her. And she came to the place wherein she had
buried his body by the side of Saint Stephen, so that she might take her husband’s body
and bury it in the church, which Alexander had built in Constantinople in honor of Saint
Stephen. Now her husband’s coffin was like unto the coffin containing the body of Saint
Stephen--and by the will of God she took the coffin wherein was the body of Saint
Stephen, and carried it away to the city of Ascalon, and there she embarked with it in a
ship to go to the city of Constantinople. As they were sailing over the sea she heard
singing and many praises coming from the coffin, and she marveled exceedingly. And she
rose up that she might look at that coffin, and she knew that it was the coffin wherein was
the body of Saint Stephen, and she understood that this had happened through the Will of
God, to Whom be praise! She was unable to return to Jerusalem, and she gave thanks unto
God the Most High, because of what He had done unto her. When that woman arrived in
the city of Constantinople, she went to the emperor and made known unto him the history
of Saint Stephen, and how signs had taken place, and how he had arrived at the port of the
city of Constantinople. And the emperor and the archbishop, and priests, and the people of
the city went forth and they came to the body of the saint, and they carried it upon their
heads with singing and many hymns, and with joy and gladness until they brought it to the
royal palace. And both in the ship and in the royal palace God made manifest many signs.
And they laid the body of the holy man upon a wheeled cart drawn by two oxen, and when
30

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
they came to the place which is called Constantinople, wherein the holy man wished them
to lay his body, the oxen stood still and would not go any further and they stood there.
And when they beat the oxen they heard a voice, which came from one of the oxen, saying,
“It is meet for them to deposit the body of Saint Stephen in this place.” And all those who
saw and heard this praised God, and they knew that He Who had made the unclean she-ass
of Balaam to speak was He Who had made to speak the oxen which were carrying the
body of Saint Stephen. And the emperor commanded his people to build a beautiful
church for him. And they built a beautiful church, and they laid therein a gem, a pearl of
great price, a holy thing, that is to say the body of that holy and blessed man Stephen the
apostle, the archdeacon and protomartyr.
And on this day is commemorated the righteous father, Abba Peter of the town of Taraw
(Daraw in Upper Egypt?). This holy man was blessed before God from his mother’s
womb. When he grew up to man’s estate he was perfect in heart, and he labored
strenuously in ascetic works, and he served God with fasting and prayer day and night
continually. He never ate the food, which is usually eaten by men, but he lived upon the
small quantity of grass, which he found in the desert, and because of his lack of human
food he resembled the angels in his strife. Moreover, his food was the repetition of the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ by night and by day ceaselessly. And it was meet for him
to walk on his feet into the stream which is called ‘Alon without wetting them, for his body
had become exceedingly dry (or hard) through the great tribulation caused by the heaviness
of the iron which he wore on his body all the days of his life; for he was like unto a beast
and not a man. And he pleased God with this manner of striving, and God healed him.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 16
(September 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the consecration of the Church, and the Sanctuary, and the grave of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise, in the holy city of Jerusalem, and of all the holy
places which ‘Eleni (Helena), the empress, laid bare. And this took place in the twentieth
year of the reign of her son Constantine, after he had gathered together the Council of
Three Hundred and Eighteen Saints in the city of Nicea. And the blessed woman ‘Eleni
(Helena) took a large sum of his money, and she said unto her son Constantine, “I wish to
be blessed by God, and I will go to the holy city of Jerusalem, and I will seek for and
discover the Wood of the Life-giving Cross.” And Constantine rejoiced at these words,
and he sent soldiers with her; and he gave her much money and apparel made of costly
silks threaded with gold. When she arrived in the city of Jerusalem, and had knelt in
prayer in certain of the holy places, she made enquiries about the Wood of the honorable
and Life-giving Cross. And with much toil and tribulation she found the Wood of the
Cross, and she praised it with great praises, and she paid unto it very great reverence and
honor. Then she commanded her men to build the altar of the sanctuary, and [shrines at]
Golgotha, and Bethlehem, and the cave wherein our Lord Jesus Christ was born, and the
fortress of Zion, and Gethsemane wherein was buried the body of our Lady the holy Virgin
31

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Mary, and the Mount of Olives, and all the holy places; and she commanded [the builders]
to decorate them with pearl, and with gold, and with silver. Now there was in Jerusalem a
certain bishop whose name was Abba Macarius, and he gave her counsel, saying, “Do not
thus, for after a few days [foreign] peoples will come and will rule over this country, and
they will take possession of this place, and will lay it waste, and will seize whatsoever is
made of gold and silver and precious stones. But it is meet that you should build a good,
strong building which can neither be overthrown nor torn up from the foundations. And
the remainder of this money give unto the poor and the needy.” And the Empress “Eleni
(Helena) accepted his words and delivered much money into his hand, and she commanded
all the nobles to build [a building of this kind], and to obey Abba Macarius the bishop in
everything which he ordered them to do in the matter of the building. When the Empress
‘Eleni (Helena) returned to her son Constantine and told him what she had done in
Jerusalem, he rejoiced exceedingly, and he sent a further large sum of money, and
overseers were appointed over the building. And the emperor commanded them to pay the
workmen and all those who served in the work of building their wages daily at eventide
without fail, for the emperor feared lest they should suffer and lest they should complain if
their wages were not paid to them, and lest God should be angry with him because of their
complaint. And when the building of the holy places was finished in the third year of the
reign of the righteous Emperor Constantine he sent holy vessels and apparel made of silk
and gold which was exceedingly costly. And he sent messages to the Archbishop of the
city of Constantinople to take his bishops, and to Athanasius, the Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria, to take the bishops of his diocese, and also to the Archbishop of the city of
Antioch, and he commanded them all to gather together in the city of Jerusalem and to
consecrate the sanctuary and all the altars of the places which had been built [by ‘Eleni
(Helena)]. And they all assembled in the city of Jerusalem, and they tarried there until the
seventeenth day of the month Meskerem, by which day they had consecrated the sanctuary
and all the altars of the places (i.e. shrines), which had been built. On that day there was
joy, the like of which had never before existed. They performed the appointed service, and
they consecrated the Holy Offerings, and they partook of the Holy Mysteries, and a great
light appeared, and many signs [were wrought] on that day, the sixteenth of Meskerem.
And they marched round into all the holy places with the Honorable Cross, and they
worshipped God therein, and they received the Holy Mysteries, and they adored the
Honorable Cross and sang litanies thereto, and [then] they departed to their countries in
peace.
And on this day also died Obit, the son of Gabael of the seed of ‘Asael, of the tribe of
Naphtali, who was carried off into captivity in the days of ‘Anemesor, the King of Persia
(sic), he was a native of Tabes, on the right hand of Kades, which is Naphtali in Galilee,
which is above ‘Aser. Tobit walked the path of righteousness and integrity all the days of
his life. And the alms were many which he made to his brethren, and to his kinsfolk who
went to the country of Persia, and all the people who had apostatized and who offered
sacrifice to Baal and the Calf. And Tobit went frequently to Jerusalem, and he took the
wool of his flock with him, and the tenth of his crop, and he gave one-third to the poor.
When all his brethren were taken captives to Nineveh they ate with the Gentiles, but he
restrained himself from eating because he remembered God with all his heart. One day he
found the dead body of a man in the market place, and he rose up although fasting and
brought it into a house until the sunset, and when the sun had set he dug a hole in the
ground and buried him. That night he lay down to sleep against the wall of his garden, and
he did not know that there were birds [nesting] in the wall. And when he uncovered his
32

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
face these birds voided warm dung into his eyes, and a smoke went forth through his eyes
and there was no man who could give him relief. And Tobit entreated God, saying,
“Remember me, O Lord, and look upon my miserable estate, and remember not my sins
nor the sins of my fathers, for Thou hast made us to be led away into captivity and to be
scattered. And now, even according as it pleaseth Thee deal with me before Thee, and
command that my earth may return so that I may dissolve and become dust; for it is better
for me to die than to live.” And on that day the evil spirit Asmodeus found Sara, the
daughter of Raguel, for he had married her to seven men, and when these men approached
her he slew them. At length the handmaidens of her father reviled and abused her, and she
continued to weep and pray to God that He would save her from their abuse; and her
prayer and the prayer of Tobit were heard before the Majesty, praise [be unto Him], and
Rafael [was sent to heal them both]. And Tobit remembered the silver, which he had
committed to the care of Gabael, and he called his son Tobias, and he said unto him, “Seek
out for thyself a hireling who shall go with thee to Gabael that he may bring back the
money which I committed to his care before I die.” And Tobias found Rafael, who was in
the form of a hired servant, and he went with Tobias, who named him “Azarias.” And they
journeyed along the road, and they arrived in the evening at the Tigris, and Tobias went
down to the river to wash, and a fish leaped out upon him. And Rafael said unto Tobias,
“Seize him, and take out his heart, and his liver, and his gall”; and Tobias did as Rafael had
commanded him. And when they arrived in the house of Raguel, Sara received them, and
Tobias desired her, and he spoke unto her father so that he might give her to him; and
Raguel said unto him, “I have married her to seven men, and all of them have died”; and
Tobias said, “The Lord’s will be done.” And when they brought Tobias and Sara into the
marriage-chamber, Tobias remembered the words of Rafael, and he burned away in smoke
the heart and the gall of the fish, and the devil fled from Sara. And he returned with her to
the house of his father, and when Tobit had received him Tobias smeared his father’s eyes
with the gall of the fish. And when Tobit rubbed his eyes and there removed itself from
his eyes as it were smoke, and he saw his son, he rejoiced and he prophesied concerning
the sufferings of Christ, saying, “Blessed be all those who sorrow for Thy suffering, for
they shall rejoice in Thee when they see all Thy glory.” And again he said, “The walls of
the Jerusalem which is in the heavens shall be built of sapphire, and emerald, and precious
stones, and its tower and its gates shall be of pure gold. And the court thereof shall be
made of beryl and carbuncle and sapphire, and all its paths shall say ‘Hallelujah.’” And he
also prophesied that the Israelites who were captives in Babylon should return, and should
build Jerusalem with glorious mason’s work. And Tobit commanded his son Tobias to
depart from Nineveh, for he knew that the spoliation thereof which Jonah the prophet had
prophesied would take place. And he said unto his son, “See my son that thine alms do
save thee and justify thee”; and with these words his soul went forth into its rest in the one
hundred and fifty-eighth year of his age; and Tobias buried him with honor.
And on this day also are commemorated Warkela, and Simeon, and Markenos (Marcianus)
[and ‘Azyanos, and Hali, and Ronikos], and Lucianus, and ‘Azremanos, and Peter, and
Hannah, and Abba Agathon who stopped his mouth with a stone.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

33

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 17
(September 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the Honorable Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
Whom be praise, for this is the day on which the holy woman, the Empress Helena,
beloved of God, mother of the righteous Emperor Constantine, revealed the Cross, for
having cleared away the hill of Golgotha she found [there] the Honorable Cross. And why
did this great hill come into being? It was because of the many signs and wonders, which
were made manifest at the holy tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ; for the dead were raised,
and the paralytics were healed, and the sick were made whole. And because of these
things the Jews were furiously angry, and they sent forth a decree throughout all the
country of Judea and Jerusalem ordering that every man should cast the sweepings of his
house, and the ashes, and offal of every kind on the grave of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
the Jews did this for more than two hundred years, and the ashes and the offal formed a
very great heap, and they did so until the Empress Helena came to Jerusalem. And Helena
seized certain Jews and shut them up in prison until they told her where the grave of our
Lord Jesus Christ was, and she forced them to remove that hill, and the Honorable Cross
was discovered. And she built a beautiful church for it, and she consecrated it, and she
made a great festival in honor thereof on the seventeenth day of Mesekerem, which is this
day. And all the Christian people came from all their countries to Jerusalem, and they
made a great festival in honor of the Honorable Cross, similar to the festival of the
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now as certain Christians were journeying along
the road, there was with them a certain man, a Samaritan, whose name was Isaac, and there
were many Samaritans with him. And that Isaac the Samaritan was jibing at the Christians
and reviling them and saying unto them, “Why do ye trouble yourselves in vain? Why do
ye go and bow down before a mere log of wood?” And among the Christians was a certain
righteous man, a priest whose name was ‘Odokis (Eudoxius), and as they were traveling
along the road some of the Christians became thirsty, and they could not find water to
drink. And they arrived at a certain well, and they found in it foul and bitter water, and
they were suffering greatly from thirst. And Isaac the Samaritan began to laugh at them,
and he said unto them, “If your faith was the True Faith this foul and bitter water would
change itself and would become sweet water.” And when ‘Okokis (Eudoxius) the priest
heard these words from him, he became moved with a divine zeal, and he debated with
Isaac the Samaritan. And Isaac the Samaritan said unto him, “If I saw any power in the
Name of the Cross then I myself would believe in Christ.” Then the holy man ‘Odokis
(Eudoxius) prayed over that foul water, and it became sweet immediately, and all the
people and their animals drank there from. When Isaac the Samaritan was athirst and
wished to drink of the water which was in his own water-skin, he found that it was stinking
and that there were worms in it. And he wept very bitterly, and he came to Saint ‘Odokis
(Eudoxius) the priest, and he bowed down at his feet, and he believed on the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And he drank of that water which had become sweet, through the
prayer of the holy man ‘Odokis (Eudoxius). Now there was in that water such great power
that it became sweet to those who were believers and bitter to the infidels and pagan folk.
And there appeared in that water a cross of light, and they built over that water a beautiful
church. When Isaac the Samaritan came to the city of Jerusalem, he went to the bishop,
who baptized him with Christian baptism, him and all the men of his house, and they
34

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
entered the Christian faith and became believers. Now the Honorable Cross appeared unto
them on the tenth day of Megabit, but as they were unable to celebrate a festival in its
honor during a fast, they celebrated its festival on the day of the consecration of the church,
which was the seventeenth day of Mesekerem, the day of its appearance in the holy tomb.
And on this day also the blessed Theognosta died. The holy woman lived in the days of
the righteous Emperors Honorius and Arcadius. In those days an envoy came with gifts
from the King of India to the righteous Emperors Honorius and Arcadius. And when the
envoys of the King of India were returning, they found this virgin Theognosta with a book
in her hand, which she was reading, and they seized her and carried her back with them to
their country. And she became the head of the harim, and she had charge of the wives of
the King of India, and of all the people of his house. And in those days the son of the king
fell sick of a grievous sickness, and Saint Theognosta took him into her bosom and made
over him the sign of the Cross, and he recovered straightway. And the report of this virgin
was heard throughout the land by reason of the wonderful thing which took place through
her, and from that day onward she was no longer regarded as a handmaiden but as a great
lady. When the King of India went to war there came upon him clouds, and storm winds,
and fog and darkness, and the king knowing of the wonder which the holy woman
Theognosta had wrought by means of the Cross, made the sign of the Cross against the
clouds, and the storm winds, and the fog and the darkness, and the sun appeared and there
was joy and great gladness, and through the sign of the Cross the king vanquished his
enemies. And as soon as the king returned from the war, he bowed down at the feet of
Saint Theognosta, and asked her to give him holy Christian baptism, him, and the men of
his house, and all the men of his city. And she said unto the king and unto all those who
were with him, “It is not seemly for me to do this thing, but send ye to the Emperor
Honorius and ask him to send you a priest, for I am unable to baptize anyone.” And
straightway the king sent a letter to the Emperor Honorius, and told him that they had
withdrawn [from Paganism] to the Faith of Christ, and he asked him to send to them a
priest to baptize them with Christian baptism. And Honorius sent unto them a priest who
was a righteous anchorite, and he baptized them with Christian baptism, and consecrated
for them the Offering, and gave them the Holy Body and Honorable Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And the virgin Theognosta, the beloved of God, rejoiced exceedingly, and
she knew that priestly anchorite, and they each blessed the other. And she built for him a
house for the religious, and very many virgins gathered together there, and they loved the
nun’s garb of Theognosta and became like unto her. When that priestly anchorite had
baptized them with Christian baptism, he returned to the Emperor Honorius, and related
unto him how he had baptized the men of India, and how they had entered into the Faith of
Christ. And the emperor Honorius rejoiced exceedingly, and he commanded the
Archbishop of the city of Rome to consecrate that anchorite bishop of the Indians; and the
archbishop consecrated him bishop, and he returned to the Indians and they rejoiced
greatly. Whilst they were building a church they wanted pillars, but there were none to be
found; now there was in that place a house of idols wherein were some very fine pillars.
And the virgin Theognosta prayed to our Lord Jesus Christ with tears, and the pillars,
which were in the house of idols removed themselves, and came to the church, and the
believers glorified our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise! And those who were
worshippers of idols smashed their idols, and turned and entered the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and there was great joy in that city. And Saint Theognosta the virgin ended
her days, and she was well pleasing unto God, and she died in peace in that nunnery among
the virgins.
35

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Dionysius, Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria; of the number of the archbishops he is the fourteenth. The infidel Emperor
Decius wished to kill this holy man, but God hid him from him. This father was a wise
and learned man, and he translated many of the Books of the Church. In his days Saint
Mercurius became a martyr by the hand of Decius, the Emperor of Rome, and in his days
also the Seven Youths went to sleep for three hundred and seventy and two years. These
Youths were among the sons of the elders of the city of Ephesus, and they fled from the
Emperor Decius when he sought for them to make them worship idols. And in the days of
this father lived our great and holy father Anthony the Egyptian, the head of the monks,
who built monasteries. And this holy father Abba Dionysius sat as archbishop for nineteen
years, and he guarded his flock and the Gentiles in right and in peace; and he was well
pleasing unto God and he died.
And on this day also are commemorated Labiba (Liba), and ‘Akiryanos (Cirianus), and
Justin, and Tekaseltes (Tekaleltes).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 18
(September 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Eustathius, a teacher of the faith and a preacher of the Gospel. The name
of the father of this holy man was Christos Mo’A, and the name of his mother was Sena
Haywat; and they were both righteous and fearers of God, and they walked in all His
judgments. And when Christos Mo’A, after the glad tidings of an angel, begat this child he
called him Ma’Akara ‘Egzi’E. When he grew up he taught him the Psalms of David and
the Books of the Church. Then he took him to the monastery of Abba Zacharias, his
mother’s brother, who when he saw him knew that the grace of God was dwelling upon
him, and he taught him all the rules of monasticism, and he arrayed him in the apparel of
the angels. And the young man fasted and prayed with such intense devotion that the
elders of the monastery marveled at the sternness of his strife; and he was girded with
wisdom and knowledge. After a short time he was made a deacon, and he ministered in
the church like Stephen the archdeacon. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him
with Michael and Gabriel, and He embraced him and breathed into his face the Holy
Spirit. And He said unto him, “O my beloved Eustathius, I have chosen thee from thy
mother’s womb, and heave appointed thee to become a teacher of many nations from
Ethiopia to Armenia. And thou shalt preach the Gospel without fear and trepidation. He
who heareth thee heareth Me; he who rejecteth thee rejecteth Me.” When our Lord Jesus
Christ had said this unto him He went up into heaven. And Saint Eustathius went to the
bishop and was appointed priest, and he began to preach the faith of the Gospel. At length
very many men gathered together to him, and they became monks through him and they
became disciples [of him], now the greatest of them was Abba ‘Absadi, and he turned
many from their iniquity, and at length they forsook their evil works. And his doctrine
filled the whole earth, and in his days the honoring of Sabbaths and days of festival was
established, and he turned not aside from [the ordinances of] the Apostles, neither to the
36

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
right hand nor to the left. And he made two pilgrimages to Jerusalem, and God made
manifest through him signs and wonders which were innumerable in opening the eyes of
the blind, and in healing the paralytics, and in casting out devils. Then he decided that he
would go to Jerusalem by the will of God, and he gathered together his sons, and he laid
upon them the charge of keeping all the canon of the monks, and of keeping themselves
from mingling with the pagans; and he appointed his son ‘Absadi chief over them. And he
went to Jerusalem and kept the Sabbath as he went, and he taught the faith of Christ. And
he came to the Archbishop ‘Abba Benyamin and was blessed by him, and they conversed
together on matters of the Faith. Then he went down to Jerusalem and was blessed in the
holy places, and was baptized in the Jordan. Thence he departed to Armenia, and having
arrived at the sea of Jericho he asked the sailors to allow him to embark in a ship. And
when they prevented him from doing so, he cast his head-fillet into the sea, and said a
blessing over it in the Name of the Trinity, and made over it the sign of the Cross. Then he
got up upon the fillet as upon a ship, and two angels acted as sailors, and our Lord acted as
captain, and they carried over his sons who had no fear of the terror of the sea. And
Eustathius said unto his sons, “Only take heed that ye do not lay up revenge and malice in
your hearts; it seemeth to me however that one of you is about to perish.” And before he
had finished uttering these words one of his sons dropped into the sea and was drowned
because he was treasuring revenge and malice in his heart. And by God’s will they crossed
over the sea and came to the country of Armenia, and he held converse with the
archbishop, and did homage to him, and was blessed by him. When the archbishop saw
him he rejoiced with exceeding great joy, and he received him gladly. And our father
Eustathius continued to teach the men of Armenia the canons of the apostles, which are in
the ordinance of the Synod until they were all one brotherhood in doctrine. When the time
for his departure from this world had drawn nigh, our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him,
and made a covenant with him in respect of those who should invoke his name, and those
who should celebrate his commemoration, and those who should do into writing the story
of his fight. And when he died the bishops and priests prepared him for burial with great
honor, and they buried him in the church of Mar Mehnam (i.e. Behnam) the martyr, and
many miracles happened through his body.
Salutation to Eustathius and to his fillet whereon he crossed the sea.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Helena, the mother of Constantine the
righteous emperor. In the days of this holy woman the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be praise, was found.
And on this day also died Saint Abba ‘Onorewos (Honorius) the teacher [in the monastery]
of Segadj.
And on this day also Saint Mercurius became a martyr. This holy man was a Persian jester
and musician; originally he was a Christian. When Constantine, the son of Constantine the
Great, died, there reined after him Julian the infidel, who slew Saint Mercurius. Now
Julian was the son of Constantine’s sister. This denier of God worshipped idols, and he
afflicted the Christian peoples grievously, and by his means very many became martyrs.
When he was born there were gathered together those who jested and played music, and
those who made men laugh, and this holy man Mercurius was among their number. And
the infidel Julian ordered the holy man to show him what the system of Christianity was,
and what they did in church. And Mercurius did according to what the infidel emperor had
commanded him, and he made a jest and mockery of all the ordinances of the Church.
37

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And there was very great merriment. And when he was making a mockery of the
ordinance of holy Christian baptism, and was making the sign of the Cross over the water
in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, One God, the Lord illumined
the heart of Mercurius, and he saw the Divine Grace of God through heaven, and an
exceedingly great light enveloped him. And straightway Mercurius stripped off his
apparel, and went down into the water, and was dipped in the water three times in the
Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, One God. Then he went up out of the
water, and put on his raiment and confessed that he was a Christian. And the emperor was
wroth with him and he threatened him, saying, “Unless thou doest as I command thee, and
unless thou castest incense to the gods, I will torture thee with the greatest severity. On the
other hand, if thou wilt hearken to my command I will give thee very much money and I
will honor thee exceedingly.” And Saint Mercurius answered and said unto him, “If thou
wert to give me all the money in this world and the kingdom thereof, I would not deny my
Lord Jesus Christ.” Then straightway the infidel emperor commanded his soldiers to cut
off his holy head, and Mercurius received an incorruptible crown in the kingdom of the
heavens.
And on this day it is meet that we should celebrate also the festival of the Honorable and
Life-giving Cross of our Lord and God Jesus Christ.
And on this day also died the warrior Mar Jacob, the Egyptian. This holy man had
righteous and believing parents, and they gave him as a votive offering to God. When he
had finished his instruction in the school house his parents took him into the mountains of
Alexandria, and they gave him to the Archimandrite Abba Gabriel, and he made him a
monk when he was a boy twelve years of age. When he was twenty years of age he went
forth with his teacher into the desert in order to strive in the ascetic life. And they found
there a high tower, and at the bottom was a spring of water, and Abba Gabriel and Mar
Jacob went up to the top of the tower; and they used to draw water from the stream and
pour it out into hollows which were like troughs in the ground, and every day the wild
animals of the desert used to come there and drink there from. And the holy man Mar
Jacob used to milk them, and make cheese from the milk, and he and his teacher lived
thereon. When Abba Gabriel died, Mar Jacob went up to the top of the tower, and by the
Will of God there came to him twelve desert monks, and they dwelt with him in fasting
and prayer, and they lived upon the milk of the animals, and the want of wheat for the
monastery was supplied by the pilgrims who came from afar. One day they said, “It is our
desire to see Abba Moses the Black (i.e. the Ethiopian), and to be blessed by him.” And
Satan because he coveted to be loved by them, took the form of Abba Moses the Black,
and he came flying on his wings and said unto them, “Why do ye trouble me to drag
myself from mine own place, seeing that I am an old man?” And they said unto him, “We
wish to hear the word of life from thy lips, and we wish thee to bless us.” And he said unto
them, “How do ye live?” And they said that they poured out water for the wild animals of
the desert, and that when they came to drink, they milked them and lived upon their milk
each evening. And Satan said unto them, “Will ye not listen unto what I shall command
you?” And they said unto him, “Yea.” And Satan said unto them, “Take ye not the milk
of the beasts and ye shall not do violence unto them, for ye are monks. And fast ye forty
days at a time, and do not pray the Psalms of David, for David took the wife of Uriah by
violence and slew him.” And he addressed a very large number of profitless exhortations
to them so that he might ensnare them by his wiles, and they received his words imagining
that they were the words of Abba Moses the Black. Then the Holy Ghost made Mar Jacob
38

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to understand that his words were the teaching of Satan, and he commanded his disciples
to consecrate the Offering on the first day of the week, and afterwards he showed his sons
that the words that had been said to them were of Satan. And Satan came unto him again
disguised as the Archbishop of Alexandria, and there were bishops with him, and when he
came he cursed them and anathematized them, saying, “Why are ye living here without my
permission?” And Saint Abba Jacob saw the extent of his power with his disciples, and he
made a prayer, and straightway Satan disappeared and his counsel did not remain.
Sometimes Satan came unto him in the form of a serpent, and sometimes in the form of a
king, and sometimes in the forms of beautiful virgins, and sometimes he took the forms of
eagles and ravens that tore [his] face with their claws. And he was tempted for seven
years. Then when God saw his weariness and his prayer, He sent lightning from heaven,
and it rent Satan in pieces, and scattered him like smoke. And Satan cried out, saying,
“Woe is me by reason of thee, O Jacob, for thy prayer hath burned me up.” And then God
commanded Mar Jacob to go to the monastery of ‘Abdin, and he told his sons this, and
having laid upon them the charge that they were to dwell in the tower, he departed alone to
the shore of Jericho. And as there was no ship there, he blessed a wave of the sea, and he
embarked upon it, and traveled upon it as upon dry land until he crossed the sea and
arrived at Tarsus. And as he passed through a market-place in the city, he found a
wounded man with worms devouring him. And the holy man said unto him, “What is thy
name?” And the man said unto him, “My name is ‘Anthony’; my father gave me money
for the physicians, and they have not healed me.” And Mar Jacob saw that the man was
grieving because of his disease, and he made a prayer, and laid his hands on every part of
his body, and said unto him, “In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ be made whole,” and
straightway the man was healed. And forthwith Anthony followed him and became his
disciple. Then the holy man and his disciple went on their way, and when they arrived at
the city of ‘Amid they found the son of King Anestus mad, and he was beating his head on
the stones, and no one could restrain him. And Mar Jacob commanded his disciple
Anthony to seize him, and to bring him to him; and when he arrived he made over him the
sign of the Honorable Cross, and he commanded Satan in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ to go forth from him. And Satan went forth from him in the form of a black slave,
and the young man recovered and followed the holy man; and when his father and the
people saw him they rejoiced with very great joy. Now the king wished to give Mar Jacob
much money, but the holy man refused it and would not take it. And by the commandment
of God he departed with Abba Barsabo, a teacher of the monastery of the city of ‘Abdin,
and as he was traveling on the road Anthony fell sick of the smallpox, and on the third day
he died. And when Mar Jacob came to a city, the name of which is ‘Awersa, he found that
the son of the governor was sick, and through the prayer of the holy man Mar Jacob he
recovered. When his father saw that he had recovered he rejoiced with very great joy, and
he handed him over to the holy man to be his disciple until the day of his death. Now the
name of the young man was Fekur. And when they drew nigh unto the monastery of
Barsabo, the monks welcomed them and brought them in with much singing. Now there
was built by the side of this city a certain temple, and the King of Persia, who was called
Samer, used to come there every year and celebrate a festival in honor of his idols. And
Mar Jacob said unto the monks, “Behold, we have heard that the King of Persia hath come,
let us go to him and shed out blood for the sake of the Name of Christ, to Whom be
praise!” And whilst the monks were considering this advice the soldiers of the king
arrived in the monastery, and they saw that the monks were wearing black apparel, and
they said unto them, “What are ye? Which of the gods do ye worship?” And the holy men
39

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
said, “We worship the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, Who came down from
heaven, and became man through the Holy Ghost by Mary the holy Virgin, to Him do we
bow down and Him do we worship.” When the soldiers heard them they carried them
away to the king, and when they arrived before the king they confessed the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And the king enquired what their country was, and Abba Barsabo said,
“I and my brethren are Romans,” and Saint Abba Jacob saith, “I am by myself; I am an
Egyptian.” When the king heard his words he commanded his soldiers to remove Jacob
against his will, for he did not wish to kill him because he had a treaty with the men of
Egypt. And the king ordered his soldiers to beat the monks, and they beat them until their
blood flowed from their bodies like water, and he then had them cast into the prison house
[where] the angel of the Lord healed them; on the following day when the soldiers found
them alive, the king [promised to] bestow many gifts upon them. But when they treated
his word with contempt he commanded his soldiers to torture them by crushing their feet
into [iron] boots, and by beating them, and drawing out their front teeth, and grinders, and
by drawing out of the nails of the hands and feet, and by cutting off their noses, and lips,
and ears; this they did for a period of six days; but our Lord Jesus Christ gave them
strength [to endure]. On the eighth day he commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads,
and Mar Barsabo addressed them, and after he had exhorted them, he delivered them one
by one into the hand of the swordsman, and ten monks were crowned. And the captain of
the horse of the king on seeing the crowning of the saints stripped off his apparel and
confessed our Lord Jesus Christ, and his head also did they cut off with the sword. After
the sons of Mar Barsabo were dead he himself stretched out his neck, and said unto the
swordsman, “Finish what thou hast been commanded [to do],” and straightway he gave
him his neck. And the martyrdoms of the saints were finished on the twenty-eighth day of
the month Nehasse (Aug. 7 - Sept. 5). Then the king ordered his soldiers to burn their
bodies with fire, but the earth opened her mouth and covered them. And the king being
ashamed wanted to depart to his own country. Thereupon Mar Jacob prayed to God and
He rained upon him fire [mingled] with black clouds, and hail and snow, and he and all his
soldiers perished, and not one of them remained [alive]. When the men on the frontiers
heard this they all went out and took their horses and all their goods, and they carried them
to Mar Jacob and said unto him, “Take all these goods for thy needs,” but he refused to do
so, and commanded them to build a little church over the grave of the holy martyrs; [and
they did so] and there it remaineth unto this day. One day there was a plague (or smallpox)
in a certain city, and the people sent to Mar Jacob asking him to help them by his prayers;
and when Mar Jacob heard of the plague he was very sorry. And having taken the censer
he went into the church, and he prayed a long time, and having gone forth from the church
he said unto the messengers, “Be not afraid, neither grieve ye; depart ye in peace.” When
the messengers arrived they found the city in a healthy state, and they praised the God of
Saint Jacob. And there was a certain maiden who came with her father to the holy man,
and she lusted for the holy disciple whose name we have mentioned, and she wanted to
cast him down in sin. When he refused her she became with child by a certain servant of
her father, and she acted craftily in the matter. When her father heard of this he set out to
kill Mar Jacob and his disciple, and as he was going along the road [to do so] lightning fell
upon him and blinded his eyes. After a few days his daughter brought forth her child, and
she carried the child to saint Mar Jacob in the midst of the congregation. And Mar Jacob
said unto the child, “In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ I command thee to declare the
name of thy father.” And the child said, “My father is so-and-so, the servant of my
mother’s father”; and when the people heard this they marveled and praised God. When
40

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the time of Mar Jacob’s departure from the world drew nigh, he commanded his disciple
Daniel, saying, “Behold my departure draweth nigh. When I am dead bury me with Mar
Barsabo and his sons.” Three days after this he died in peace, and the angels took his soul
up into Jerusalem.
Salutation to Jacob the strenuous ascetic!
Salutation to Jacob the priest!
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Stephen the priest, and Niceta the martyr.
And on this day also were found the bones of Thomas and of Archbishop Athanasius; and
on this day are commemorated our father the admirable Philotheus [the Thaumaturge], and
Abba Nob the anchorite, and the martyrs who were with ‘Aboli - forty men and twenty
women.
And on this day also are commemorated ‘Efomya (Euphemia) the martyr, and Abba
Finomis, and Selhan, and ‘Akalaeles, and Isaac.
And on this day also took place the miracle which Thomas the apostle wrought when he
went to preach the Gospel in the country of India. Now he was afraid, and he said, “How
can I go to India, the country of which I know not?” Then our Lord Jesus Christ appeared
unto him and said unto him, “Fear thou not, for My grace is with thee.” And whilst he was
with our Lord there came a merchant from India. And our Lord said unto him, “What dost
thou want?” And the merchant said, “I want a carpenter”; and he sold him for three letra
of silver. And he wrote a paper which testified, saying, “I have sold my servant, the son of
Joseph the carpenter, to ‘Abenes, a merchant of Gona”; and Thomas’s [new] master took
him to the city of the king. When they drew nigh unto the city they heard [the sound of]
organs and pipes, and they said, “What is this?” And the people said unto them, “The king
has made a marriage-feast for his daughter, and he has ordered that whosoever doth not
come to the wedding shall be punished.” And ‘Abenes and Thomas went into the room of
the feast, and while the guests ate and drank Thomas the apostle ate nothing at all. And
there he found a Hebrew singing maiden who was singing songs in the Hebrew language.
And whilst the apostle was praying in the Hebrew language one of those who were at the
feast struck him; and the apostle said, “I see a hand with the dogs tearing at it”; and the
singing woman alone heard him because he spoke in the Hebrew Language. And the man
who smote Thomas went down to the lake (or well) to draw water, and a lion sprang out
and slew him and left him lying in pieces. And a dog seized the right hand and carried it in
among the people at the feast, and one said unto Thomas, “Who is dead?” And he said
unto them, “This is the hand of him who struck one who serveth.” When the singing
maiden heard this, she cast sway her tambourine and went and sat at the feet of the apostle,
and she said, “I heard thee say unto him, ‘The gods shall tear the hand which smote me.’”
When the people heard this some believed and some did not. When the king heard this he
said unto Thomas, “Come and pray over my daughter, for this day have I given her in
marriage.” And when the apostle had entered the marriage-chamber he prayed to the Lord
in the form of Thomas, on behalf of the bride and bridegroom, and admonished them with
the words of faith, and they believed the words of the apostle, and abandoned their
marriage.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
41

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM

Meskerem 19
(September 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated Saint Gregory, Archbishop of the country of Armenia, who
became a martyr without the shedding of his blood. This man established himself in the
country of Armenia in the days of Dertades the king. Now that king was an infidel, and
when he came into his temple to offer up incense to the gods, he summoned Gregory to
offer up incense to his gods likewise; but Gregory would not obey the king’s command,
and he tortured him with exceedingly severe tortures, and had him burned with fire. After
this he cast him into a pit naked, and he lived therein for fifteen years. And there was a
certain old woman a widow, near the king’s palace, and she saw a vision wherein one said
unto her, “Make bread regularly, and cast it into the pit wherein the holy man is.” And the
old woman continued to act in this wise, and she cast bread into the pit until the fifteen
years were ended. In those days that king killed the virgins, namely Saint ‘Arsima, and the
virgins who were with her, and their bodies were thrown out upon the mountain. And
Satan made himself master of King Dertades, and the Lord changed his appearance, and he
became like unto a wild boar, and Satan also made himself master of very many of the
royal officers, and there was very great sorrow in the royal house. And the king’s sister
saw a vision one night wherein it seemed that a man said unto her, “Unless ye bring up
Gregory out of the pit thou wilt never be able to cure him (i.e. the king).” And straightway
they went into the pit and brought Saint Gregory out there from, and he healed the king
forthwith and all those who were in his house. And he made the bodies of the virgins
ready for burial, and laid them in a beautiful tomb. Now the whole history of him is
written in the section for the fifteenth day of Tahsas, which is the day whereon he died.
And on this day also is celebrated the festival of the Holy and Honorable Cross, for when it
was found the people made a festival for three days with joy and gladness. Similarly it is
meet that we ourselves should celebrate a festival of commemoration in its honor with
great joy, for in it there is the joy of our salvation from our enemy Satan, and praise to our
Lord Jesus Christ.
Salutation to the Tree of Life, the bed of the Son of Mary!
Salutation to the Tree of Life, which was sprinkled with the Divine Blood!
And on this day also died Kirkos (Cyriacus), the dweller in the desert. This holy man lived
in the days of Abba Benyamin, and he fled from the Emperor Marcianus, the evil one, and
established himself as an anchorite on the top of a high mountain. He lived in a cave
wherein wild animals lived, and he begged his food from God. And God commanded a
she-buffalo to go to him every third day, and he drank milk from her, and he lived in this
manner for ten years. And Satan, the accursed one, having become jealous of his strenuous
ascetic labors, began to tempt him in all the ways and means, which he hath. At one time
he would come to him in the form of a black man to terrify him, an at another he would
come to him in the form of a company of soldiers, who threatened him with dire threats.
And horsemen seized him, and bound him with fetters, and beat him with whips, and
42

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
dragged him along the road by his feet. When he knew that these men were Satans he
made the sign of the Cross over himself, and they disappeared from before him. Once
when he was kneeling down at night praying, a thing, which was like unto a huge serpent,
coiled itself about his neck and wished to shoot venom into his face, and again he entreated
the help of God Who sent His angel and delivered him. When the time for his death drew
nigh, he went to the father Archbishop Abba Benyamin, and told him everything, and he
sent to him three archbishops to undertake the preparation of his body for burial. When
they had gone into his cave they found him very ill, and at the moment when his spirit
went forth from his body they saw great and indescribable splendor; and then they buried
him in his abode.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 20
(September 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Athanasius, the twenty-eighth Archbishop of the city
of Alexandria. This father was the steward of the church of the city of Alexandria. When
Peter the archbishop, his predecessor, died, all the bishops, and the governors (or nobles),
and the elders, and the people, with one consent agreed to appoint Saint Athanasius
archbishop, for the holiness of his life was proverbial, and he contended splendidly in the
way of God, and the Holy Spirit dwelt in him. And they took him against his will and
appointed him archbishop, and he protected the flock of our Lord Jesus Christ well and
carefully against the wolves of the devil, who are wicked Satans, by means of his
admonitions, and teachings and prayers. He sat as archbishop seven years, and he was
well pleasing to God, and he died in peace.
And on this day also the holy virgin Malidama became a martyr.
And on this day also are commemorated the virgin Athena, and Marena, and Pila, and
Abraham the monk, and Rade’e, and Sades, and Thaddeus, and Epiphanius, and the
righteous man ‘Armanyos (Armenius), and Simeon, the head of the bishops of Jerusalem,
the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 21
(October 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy honourable Cyprianus and the virgin Justina became martyrs. This
holy man Cyprianus was at one time a magician, and an infidel, and a teacher of sorcery in
a city of the West, and in knowledge of magic he excelled every other man in the city of
43

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the West. And because of his excessive impudence, and his arrogance, and his infidelity,
and his sorcery, he rose up and went to the city of Antioch in order that he might find out
whether there existed among the people of that city any other kind of magic; if there was,
and if it was superior to his own knowledge, he intended to learn it, and if there was not he
intended to triumph over them through his knowledge of sorcery. When he arrived in the
city of Antioch the report of him was heard therein, and a certain young man, the son of
one of the elders of the city of Antioch, heard of him. Now the young man lusted for a
certain Christian virgin who was called Justina, whom he had seen going to church; and his
heart was hot like the fire which blazeth because of his longing and his love for her. And
he was unable to obtain her either by the gift of money, or by the threat of death, or by the
operation of sorcery. When the young man heard of the arrival of Saint Cyprianus in the
city of Antioch, and knew that he was reported to be superior to every man in Antioch
through his sorcery, straightway he went to him, and told him about the sorrow in his heart,
caused by the virgin Justina, and how he longed for her, and how he loved her exceedingly,
but could not obtain possession of her. And Saint Cyprianus promised him, saying, “Fear
thou not, I will fulfill for thee all thy desire.” And he directed against her all the works of
his sorcery, but failed to obtain possession of her. Every time when he sent against her any
of the powers of Satan, he found her praying, and they were unable to stand before her, and
they were powerless to fight against her. When Cyprianus was tired and was unable to
gain the mastery over her, he called the Satans, and said unto them, “If ye are not able to
bring Justina the virgin to me, I shall turn and become a Christian.” And the chief of the
Satans meditated and thought out one device whereby he might seduce her, and that was
by making one of his Satans to disguise himself and to take the form of Justina, and then to
make him to appear to Cyprianus as if he were showing him Justina. And that Satan did as
Satan his master commanded him, and he hastened and made him known to Cyprianus.
And he said unto him, “Behold Justina is coming to thee”; and Cyprianus rejoiced
exceedingly, and he imagined that it was true, and he sat down and waited. And behold,
Satan disguised as Justina came unto him, and Cyprianus rejoiced, and rose up straightway
to embrace her by reason of his great joy in her, and he said unto her, “Good is thy coming,
O Justina, queen of women.” And as soon as he had uttered her name only, that Satan who
had disguised himself as Justina melted away and disappeared like smoke, and there was a
fetid smell [there]. And Cyprianus knew that this thing was a debased and deceitful trick
of Satan; and if Satan did not dare to stand before her face, and could not endure the
mention of her name, how could he have the power to seduce her? And Cyprianus rose up
straightway and burnt and destroyed his books of magic, and was baptized with Christian
baptism by the Archbishop of Antioch. Then he became a monk, and after a few days he
was made a deacon, and a little later a priest. And when he had grown old in doing good
works and in the doctrine of the Church, he became fit to be bishop of the city of
Cartagena in the country of the West. And he took Saint Justina and made her the abbess
of a house of virgins. When a General Council of the saints assembled in the city of ... this
holy man was one of those who were assembled there. And after many days Decius the
infidel emperor heard of Cyprinaus and Justina, and he had them brought before him, and
he demanded from them a denial of Christ, and he endeavored to make them worship
idols. When they would not obey his command, he tortured them with very great severity.
After this he ordered his soldiers to cut off their heads with the sword, and they cut off
their heads and Cyprianus and Justina received incorruptible crowns of martyrdom in the
kingdom of heaven.
44

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day it is meet for us to celebrate a festival of commemoration of our Lady, the
holy Virgin Mary. [A note in the Bodleian MS. says that this festival must be kept on the
21st of every month of the year.]
And on this day also there took place the death of Saint Tiberius the apostle, one of the
Seventy-two disciples.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 22
(October 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the Saints Kotolos (Cotylus) and his brother ‘Aksu became martyrs. These
holy men were the sons of Sapor, King of Persia, and they had a companion whose name
was Tatos. Now Sapor, King of Persia, worshipped fire and the sun, and he afflicted and
tortured many believing men, and no man throughout his country dared to mention the
Name of Christ. And his son Kotolos (Cotylus) had a friend whose name was Tatos, and
he was governor of the country of the Maydaswiyan; and certain people laid information
against him before Sapor the king, and told him that he was a Christian. And the king sent
to him a certain noble whose name was Tumager to find out whether that which was said
about Tatos was true or not, and he commanded that noble, if he found that Tatos was a
Christian, to inflict heavy punishment upon him. When Kotolos (Cotylus), the son of the
King of Persia, heard these words, he rose up and went to that country where his friend
Tatos was. When the noble arrived in that country and found that Tatos was a Christian,
even as the king had been informed, straightway he ordered his men to make an oven redhot and to roast him to death in it. And Saint Tatos made the sign of the Cross over his
face against the fire, and the fire died down and was extinguished. When Kotolos
(Cotylus), the son of the king, saw this miracle, he marveled exceedingly, and he said to
Tatos his friend, “How didst thou learn this magic, O my brother?” And Tatos answered
and said unto him, “This is not magic, O my brother, but it is through faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ that signs and wonders like this are performed.” And Kotolos (Cotylus)
believed on our Lord Jesus Christ. And they lighted a fire and made it to burn until the
flames thereof reached a great height, and Kotolos (Cotylus) drew nigh unto the fire, and
he made the sign of the Cross over it, and the fire turned backwards a distance of twelve
cubits. And the noble wrote his dispatch and sent it to Sapor the king, and in it he
informed him what had happened to Tatos and to Kotolos (Cotylus), the son of the King of
Persia. And the king sent messengers and had them brought to him, and his men cut off
the head of Tatos with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom
of heaven. His son Kotolos (Cotylus) he tortured with great severity, and he delivered him
over to another noble who was to torture him, and when this noble had tortured him cruelly
he shut him up in prison. And ‘Aksu, his sister came unto him in the prison house, for the
king had sent her a message that she must persuade him to return to his former relations
with him. And Saint Kotolos (Cotylus) admonished his sister, and he taught her the Right
Faith, and straightway she turned from her error, and believed on our Lord Jesus Christ.
Then Kotolos (Cotylus) sent his sister to a certain priest and he baptized her secretly with
45

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Christian baptism, and she returned to her father the king and said unto him, “It would be a
good thing for thee if there happened to thee what hath happened to me and to my brother
Kotolos (Cotylus). For there is no God but Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, Who
hath made the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and all that is therein.” And when the
king her father heard these words from her he was exceedingly wroth with her, and he
commanded his men to torture her very severely, and they did so until she yielded up her
soul unto the hand of the Lord, and she received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom
of heaven. And he tied her brother Saint Kotolos (Cotylus) to the tails of horses and he
made him to run behind them over the mountains until he yielded up his soul into the hand
of His Creator. Then he had his body cut into three parts, and his men cast them out on the
tops of the hills so that the birds of heaven might consume them. Thus Saint Kotolos
(Cotylus) finished his strife, and received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of
heaven. When the king’s soldiers had departed the Lord commanded the priests and the
holy deacons to take the bodies of the martyrs, and they went by night and took the bodies
of the martyrs, and they went by night and took the bodies of the saints, and they found
that they had become as white as snow. And they prepared them for burial with honour,
and they laid them in a beautiful tomb until the end of the days of persecution. After the
days of the persecution they built a beautiful church for them, and laid the bodies of the
saints therein, and through them very many signs and wonders were wrought.
On this day also Saint Julius became a martyr. This holy man came from the city of
‘Akfehas, and our Lord set him up to care for the bodies of the holy martyrs, and to write
the history of their contending and to prepare their bodies for burial, and to dispatch each
body to its native city. And the Lord brought blindness into the hearts of the governors,
and they never held converse with Saint Julius about any matter whatsoever, and they
never forced him to worship idols, for the Lord protected him for the sake of His servants
the martyrs. And there were three hundred men who knew how to write, and they used to
write the histories of the contending of the holy martyrs. And Julius used to minister to the
holy martyrs, and dress their wounds with healing medicines with his own hand, and the
martyrs used to bless him and declare unto him, saying, “Thou art as if thou hadst poured
out thine own blood for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be reckoned
among the number of the martyrs.” When the days of the reign of Diocletian the infidel
emperor were ended, Constantine the righteous emperor reigned. And our Lord wished to
place and to associate Saint Julius with the number of the holy martyrs and all the
righteous saints. And our Lord Christ commanded Saint Julius to go to the city of
Gamnudi in the northern part of the country of Egypt, to Armenius the governor, and to
confess before him his belief on the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Saint Julius
went, as our Lord Jesus Christ had commanded him, to Armenius the governor, and he
confessed before him that he believed on the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the
governor tortured him many times, and God raised him up whole and unharmed. Then
Saint Julius prayed to God and entreated Him to let the earth open her mouth and swallow
up the idols. And straightway the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up the seventy
idols, and their one hundred and forty priests. Now the governor had commended his men
to bring Saint Julius to him so that he might bow down to the idols; and straightway they
and their priests were destroyed and they went down into Sheol forever. And very many of
the people who were there when they saw this miracle marveled exceedingly, and they
believed on our Lord Jesus Christ and became martyrs. When Armenius the governor saw
that his gods and their priests were destroyed he believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and
went with Saint Julius to the governor of Athribis and confessed before him his belief on
46

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the governor of Athribis tortured Saint Julius with
very great severity, but our Lord Christ raised him up safely and unharmed; Julius died
thrice, and our Lord Jesus Christ raised him up from the dead thrice. One day there was to
be a festival in honour of the idols, and the people were decorating the temple with all
kinds of ornaments and lamps, and with palm branches, and branches of other trees, and
they closed the gates of the temple; and the people expected to come on the following day
and to celebrate the festival. And Saint Julius entreated God to blot out their idols, and
straightway God sent an angel who smashed the heads of the idols, and blackened their
faces with charcoal and ashes, and burnt up all the palm branches, and destroyed all the
other decorations of the temple. On the following day when the people dressed in apparel
of great price came to do according to their custom, and saw how their idols had been
destroyed, they recognized the impotence of their idols, and thy conversed among
themselves and said, “If our idols are not able to save themselves, how will they have the
power to save us?” And straightway the governor of Athribis believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ, and very many men, the number whereof could not be counted, did the same. From
this place also Saint Julius departed to the city of Tuwa, and with him were the governor of
the city of Gamnudi and the governor of the city of Athribis. And Saint Julius spoke unto
Iskander the governor of Tuwa, and said unto him, “Finish my strife for me, and command
thy men to cut off my head and let me receive the crown of martyrdom, and depart to my
Lord Jesus Christ.” And Iskander said unto him, “I will not torture thee, and I will do
nothing evil unto thee whatsoever.” And Saint Julius commanded his five hundred slaves
to sharpen their swords, and to rise up against Iskander. And they said [unto him], “If thou
dost not command [his soldiers] to cut off the heads of all of us, so that we may become
martyrs of Christ, we will kill thee.” Then Julius commanded an unclean spirit to ride
Iskander, and straightway the unclean spirit did so, and Iskander wrote a decree ordering
his servants to cut off the heads of the slaves of Julius with the sword. And straightway the
soldiers cut off the heads of all the saints, that is to say, of Saint Julius, and Saint Theodore
his son, and Saint Ionias his brother, and his five hundred slaves, and the governor of
Gamnudi, and the governor of Athribis, and a great many [other] people. Now the number
of those who became martyrs on the day of the martyrdom of Saint Julius was fifteen
hundred, and they all received their crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven. And
they took the bodies of Saint Julius and his son and his brother, and carried them to the city
of Alexandria, for there he used to live, although he was born in the city of ‘Akfehas, and
they laid them in a beautiful tomb. Afterwards they built over them a beautiful church
wherein many signs and wonders took place.
Three salutation to Julius, Theodore and Ionias.
And on this day is commemorated Balan.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

47

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 23
(October 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the righteous Saints Eunabius and Andreas became martyrs. These holy men
were sons of elders of the city of Zalda, and from their youth up they were friends in good
counsel, and they went and became monks in one of the monasteries of a city in Syria.
Afterwards they went to the holy and honorable Abba Macarius and they became his
disciples, and they dwelt with him, and were in submission to him, and they followed his
counsel, and they continued to devote themselves to a life of prayer for three years, and
they fasted and prayed by day and by night continually, in love and humility. And the
report of their fair strife and of their strenuous ascetic labors was heard [everywhere], and
the people chose Eunabius and made him a bishop, and Andreas they made a priest, and
they protected the flock of Christ well and carefully. And they fought a great fight, and
they afflicted their souls and bodies with toil and tribulation, and they continued to do so
for some years. And Julian, the infidel emperor, heard the report of them, and he sent
messengers and had them brought to him, and he commanded them to deny Christ, and to
enter the foul and wicked faith, that is to say, the worship of idols; and they would not
obey his command, and they cursed him and they cursed his filthy idols. And Julian was
wroth with them, and he tortured them severely and broke their bodies up each into several
pieces; and they yielded up their souls into the hand of God, and they received their crowns
of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens, as a reward for their monastic life, and for
their fair worship, and for their strenuous fighting and their stern asceticism, and for the
shedding of their blood, and for their faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
And on this day also Eustathius and his son and his wife became martyrs.
Salutation to Eustathius who saw our Lord Jesus Christ between the horns of a stag.
And on this day also are commemorated Thecla the virgin, the bride of Christ, and fortyfour martyrs, and the admirable Gregory [the Thaumaturge], and ‘Ensina, and Belina, and
Abba Selama the lamp of the world.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 24
(October 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Gregory the monk. This holy and blessed man was
a native of Upper Egypt, and his parents were holy and righteous Christians, and they were
exceedingly rich, and their possessions were very great. And they taught their son every
kind of sacred and profane learning, and then they taught him the doctrine of wisdom and
the art of speaking, and the Books of the Holy Church. Next they sent him to Father Isaac,
bishop of their city, and he laid his hand upon him and made him a reader; then they
48

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
required from him that he should marry a wife, but this thing he refused [to do]. After this
they brought him to the bishop, and he appointed him a full deacon. And Gregory used to
go continually to Abba Pachomius, and learn from him the way of God, and took very
much money from his parents and brought it to the Holy Father Abba Pachomius. And he
made many petitions unto him, beseeching him to give this money to those who built
monasteries, but Saint Abba Pachomius devoted it to the building of a church, and a
lodging for the monks and for his own meetings. And after this he renounced the whole
world, and all the goods and possessions thereof, and he went to Abba Pachomius, who
arrayed him in the garb of the monastic life. And Gregory dwelt with him, and labored
both in soul and body, and he fought a great fight with fasting and prayer, in lowliness, and
humility and submission, and gentleness and love. Even the fornicators when they saw
him learned from his appearance and example the fear of God, and they forsook their evil
deeds and repented, and became men of clean lives. And he dwelt with Abba Pachomius
for thirteen years. When Saint Abba Macarius came to Abba Pachomius, and dwelt with
him for a few days (now he wanted to return to the desert of Scete), this holy man Gregory
entreated Saint Abba Pachomius, saying, “O my father, permit me to go with Saint Abba
Macarius to the desert of Scete,” and he commanded him to go with him, and Saint
Gregory went with Saint Abba Macarius, and he dwelt with him for many years. Then he
asked Saint Abba Macarius to allow him to live the life of an anchorite in the desert for a
little; and he said, “Do what thou wishest.” And he departed into the mountain and dug out
a small cave for himself, and he dwelt there for seven years. And he used to come to Saint
Abba Macarius twice each year, once at the time of the festival of the birth of the Glorious
One, and once on the day of the festival of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ; and he
partook of the Holy Mysteries [on each occasion] and returned to his cave. And Abba
Macarius questioned him about all his work each year, and he revealed unto him
everything, which he saw, and Abba Macarius used to lay down for him the ascetic labors
of the monastic life, which he had to perform. When he had completed two and twenty
years of strife God wished to give him rest from this world. And He sent to him an angel
who said unto him, “After three days thou shalt depart from this fleeting world, and shalt
enter everlasting life.” And Saint Gregory called the elders of the desert of Scete, and
embraced them, and asked them to remember him, and they also asked him to remember
them before God; and after three days he died and went into everlasting life.
And on this day also died Saint Bedratos (Quadratus), one of the two and seventy disciples
whom our Lord Jesus Christ chose. This holy apostle was one of the sons of the elders of
Athens, and he was one of their learned nobles; he believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be praise, and served Him. And having received the grace of the Holy Spirit, the
Paraclete, on the day of the festival of Pentecost, he departed into many cities, and
preached the Holy and Life-giving Gospel. And he went into the city of Magnis and
preached the Holy Gospel therein, and he illumined the hearts of the men of that city with
the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he baptized them with Christian baptism. And he
taught them the life-giving commandments of the Gospel, and he appointed priests and
deacons for them. Then he went forth from them and entered the city of Athens and
preached therein; and they stoned him and tortured him very severely. After they had
tortured him they cast him into the fire, and he yielded up his soul, and received the crown
of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven.
And on this day also are commemorated Betrewa and Latayn the martyrs, and the death of
Gabriel the archbishop, and Theodore, and Netrolomes, and the strife of Saint Eusanius
49

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
(Ausanius), and Nestius, and Zianus, and Justus, and his brother ‘Elsarey, and Fratus
(Phratus), and Cosmas, and Damianus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 25
(October 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great and righteous prophet Jonah. This holy man was the son of the
widow of Beth-Sarapta of Sidon whom Elijah the prophet raised from the dead. And he
followed Elijah the prophet and ministered unto him, and he toiled with him and he was
held to be worthy of the grace of prophecy by his command to him. And God, blessed and
exalted be His Name, said unto him, “Get thee to the city of Nineveh, and preach unto the
people thereof, and tell them, ‘after three days your city shall be overthrown.’” And when
God said this unto him Jonah pondered in his heart, and said, “If God wished to destroy
them He would not have commanded me to go and preach unto them. If I go and preach
unto them, and say unto them, ‘God wisheth to destroy you, I am afraid that God, Who is
merciful, will have mercy upon them, and that I shall be unto them as a lying prophet, and
that they will never listen to my preaching at all. Now especially I am afraid that they will
kill me if I am sent unto them with a false message from God, I will arise and flee and I
will not go to that city, and I will not preach to them.” O my brethren, is there any man
whatsoever who hath the power to flee from God, the Most High? If the heart of this
prophet of the prophets of the children of Israel was thus, how could their hearts be to the
people? Now, I think that God, blessed be His Name, by the operation of His wisdom
worked in such a way that this prophet fled so that there might be made manifest the
miracle of his remaining in the belly of the whale for three days and three nights, and then
going forth from him whole and uninjured. Now this was a sign of the remaining of our
Lord Christ in the grave for three days and three nights, and of His rising from the dead
unchanged. And the Prophet Jonah rose up and fled. Now he wanted to go to the city of
Tarsus, but when he had embarked in a ship and they had put out to sea a little way, stormy
winds, and the waves and the billows of the sea, rose up against them, and they were
within a very little of sinking into the sea, and being drowned. And God put understanding
into the heart of the captain, and he said unto those who had embarked on the ship, “Cast
lots among yourselves so that we may know because of whom it is that this tribulation hath
come upon us”; and when they had cast lots among themselves the lot fell upon Jonah the
prophet. And the captain said unto him, “What hast thou done that through thee such an
affliction should come upon us?” And Jonah said unto them, “Cast me into the sea and ye
shall be saved.” And the captain and the crew entreated God, saying, “O God, demand
Thou not from us the blood of this man”; and they took him and cast him into the sea, and
a great whale swallowed him. And he remained in the belly of the whale for three days
and three nights, and then the whale cast him up on the seashore. And Jonah rose up
straightway and came into the city of Nineveh, and he preached unto the people thereof
even as God the Most High had commanded him, and he said unto them, “Know ye that
three days from this day, your city shall be overthrown, and ye shall all be destroyed”; and
he went round about the city of Nineveh for a space of three days. When the men of
50

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nineveh heard the preaching of Jonah the prophet they were exceedingly afraid, and they
believed on God and they repented and fasted and put on sackcloth made of hair and sat in
the ashes. Then the king commanded that a herald should go round about proclaiming
thus: “The king hath commanded that his nobles, and all the people, great and small, and
women and children, and sheep and oxen and goats shall fast, and that they shall neither
eat nor drink any water whatsoever, and they shall put on sackcloth made of hair; and
similarly, even the beasts shall not eat grass. And let all men forsake their evil works, that
is to say, oppression, and fornication, and lying, and theft, and fraud, and blasphemy, in
order that God may, peradventure, have mercy upon you, and remove His wrath from
you.” And straightway all the people repented, and they fasted, and begged for mercy
from God, blessed be His Name, and God had mercy on them. And the prophet Jonah was
sad with a very great sadness, and he said, “O God, take my life, for death is more
preferable to me than life.” And Jonah went outside the city and sat down there and fell
asleep. And God commanded a root of the cucumber plant, and it sprouted and grew into a
large plant, and it had offshoots and it became very leafy, and very high, and it cast its
shadow over Jonah as he was sleeping. And Jonah woke up from his sleep and saw the
cucumber plant, and he rejoiced with great joy. And on the following day God brought
slumber upon Jonah, and he fell asleep, and God commanded a worm to gnaw the
cucumber plant, and the root thereof was cut through; and God commanded a wind-storm
and it withered the cucumber plant, and the sun scorched Jonah’s head, and he woke from
his dream. When he saw that the cucumber plant had withered he was exceedingly sorry,
and he demanded for himself death. And God said unto Jonah, “Art thou exceedingly
sorry that the cucumber plant hath withered?” And Jonah said, “Yea, O Lord, I am
exceedingly sorry, even unto death.” And God said unto him, “If thou art sorry for a
cucumber plant which thou didst neither sow nor plant, and for which thou hast in no way
labored, but which flourished in a day, and withered in a day, why should I not spare
Nineveh, the great city wherein dwell more than ten hundred thousand men who know not
their right hands from their left hands, besides very many beasts? For I am the Merciful
and the Compassionate God, Who shows mercy upon every one, who turneth from his sins
and repenteth.” And Jonah rose up and returned to the land of Israel and he died there.
And the prophecy of Jonah [was made] two hundred years and more before the advent of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and he prophesied in the days of ‘Amos the king and his son
‘Ozyan. And all the days of his life were one hundred years, seventy years as a prophet,
and thirty years before he prophesied. Salutation to Jonah who slept in the belly of the
whale.
Salutation to Barbarah, and to Juliana, who appeared to two men when they came to steal
the book containing her history, and slew one and blinded the other. [This paragraph is
wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Salutation to those who are saturated with the Law and the Gospel. [This paragraph is
wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also are commemorated Roka (Foka), and John, and Andrew, and Peter,
and Antonius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

51

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 26
(October 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day God sent the angel Gabriel to Zacharias the priest, the son of Barachias, and
told him concerning John the Baptist, his son. Now Zacharias was a righteous man, and he
was exceedingly old, and his period for begetting children had passed; moreover, his wife
Elisabeth was childless, and her period for conceiving and bringing forth children was
passed. And Zacharias was praying and beseeching God continually to give him a child,
for the sake of the children of Israel who reviled him because a son had not been born unto
him, and they treated him with ignominy and contempt, and because of it they said unto
him, “He hath lost the blessing which God promised to give to our father Adam, ‘Be
fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth’”’; therefore he entreated God to give him a son.
And God, blessed be His Name, had compassion upon him, and He hearkened unto his
petition, and He sent the angel Gabriel unto him, and the angel told him about the birth of
John his son. And this angel came to Zacharias when he was standing and praying in the
sanctuary, even as the Holy Gospel saith. And he preached to him the great prophet John,
that he should precede Christ, and that he should prepare for Him His way, even as it is
said concerning the prophet, that he shall become a preacher before Him. Now Zacharias
knew his own weakness, and how far advanced his days were, and his old age, and that his
wife was barren, and for this reason he contradicted the angel and said unto him, “How can
this thing possibly happen to me, seeing that I have become old, and am a very aged man,
and my wife is barren, and she also is very old, and her days [for childbearing] are
passed.” And the angel rebuked him, and told him, saying, “I am sent unto thee from God
to speak to thee and to tell thee this thing, and it is not seemly for thee to doubt; but thou
shalt be dumb until this thing shall be fulfilled in its appointed time.” And Zacharias was
dumb until John, the preparer of the way of the Lord, was born. When they were
circumcising the child they asked his father and said unto him, “What shall he be called?”
And he wrote upon tablets saying, “His name is John.” And straightway his mouth and his
tongue were opened, and he spoke and praised God--blessed be His Name! And Zacharias
prophesied concerning his son that he should become a prophet and should go before the
face of the Messiah of God, and he prophesied concerning our Lord Jesus Christ.
Salutation to Elisabeth.
And on this day also is commemorated the translation of the body of ‘Aboli the martyr, the
son of Justus. Salutation to the translation of the body of Aboli.
And on this day also are commemorated ten thousand martyrs and ‘Agati of Egypt, and our
father, George the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

52

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 27
(October 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Eustathius and his two sons and his wife became martyrs. This man was one
of the chief generals of the Imperial Army of Rome, and he knew not God. His own
original name was Kudos, and he gave alms in abundance, and expended much charity on
the poor and needy, and God did not wish that his toil should be in vain. And Eustathius
was in the desert hunting wild animals, and one day there appeared unto him the figure of a
cross between the horns of a stag, and the cross-reached up to the clouds. And Eustathius
chased the stag into the mountains, and he pursued it that he might kill it. And the Lord
spoke unto him from between the horns of the stag, and told him His Name, and He
commanded him to go with his sons and his wife to the bishop of that city, and be baptized
with Christian baptism. And our Lord Jesus Christ informed him that poverty should come
upon him speedily. When Eustathius heard these words, he went down from the mountain,
and departed to the bishop, and he and his wife and his sons were baptized with Christian
baptism; and he abandoned his former name and called himself “Eustathius.” And
straightway all his property disappeared, and his slaves, and his handmaidens, and his
horses; and he took his wife and his sons, and he went forth from the city of Rome and
embarked in a ship. Now he took with him neither any money to pay for their passage, nor
anything else which he could give the captain [in its stead]. When they arrived in port the
captain took his wife instead of passage money, and Eustathius took his two sons and
departed. And he came to another stream which he had to cross, and he took up one of his
sons on his back to take him over the river, and he passed over; and he returned to his other
son to carry him across the river, but he found him not, because a wolf had seized him.
Now a lion had seized and carried off his other son. And Eustathius sorrowed with a very
great sorrow because of the loss of his wife and his sons, but God, great in counsel, in
Whom there is power, protected both of them unharmed. And Eustathius went on to a
certain city, and he became a guard of the village and remained one for many days. After
those days the Emperor of Rome died, and there reigned in his stead another emperor who
enquired for Eustathius and found him not. And he sent messengers out into all the district
to seek for him, and one of those messengers who had been sent out by the emperor to seek
for Eustathius came to the village wherein he dwelt. And the two men recognized each
other, and they embraced, and the messenger carried Eustathius to the emperor in great
honour. When Eustathius arrived the emperor honored him exceedingly, and appointed
him to the position in which he was formerly. And the emperor commanded that two men
should be recruited from every city for use in war. Now the two sons of Eustathius were
brought up in the same city, neither knowing the other. One day, when the two sons of
Eustathius, who had been placed in that city, were talking together, they discovered that
they were brothers; and then [the messengers] took them to the city of Rome and God was
please to set them in the house of business of their father who did not know them. As
concerning their mother whom the pagan captain of the ship seized, God protected her and
delivered her uninjured from his hand; now she was a keeper of the gardens of the city of
Rome. And the two young men came to the village where their mother was, and whilst
they were holding converse together, the younger brother spoke, and their mother
recognized that they were her sons, and she embraced them, and rejoiced in them, and they
rejoiced in her exceedingly. And the three of them met together and they went to
53

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Eustathius and informed him what had happened to them, and he knew that the woman
was his wife, and that the young men were his sons, and they embraced each other and
rejoiced together greatly. Thus they were all gathered together [again] in one place, even
as God had promised them. And they dwelt together, and whilst marveling they praised
God, blessed be His Name, because He had done good things for them. After this the
emperor who loved Eustathius died, and there reigned another emperor who worshipped
idols; and he summoned Eustathius and his wife and his sons, and had them brought unto
him. And he said unto them, “Cast incense to my gods.” And the holy men said, “We will
not worship idols, and we will not bow down to them, for we bow down to our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Living God.” And straightway the emperor was wroth with them,
and he commanded his soldiers to torture them, and they tortured them very severely, but
God raised them up whole and unharmed. Then he commanded his soldiers to cast them
into a brazen cauldron, and [when] they had done so he commanded to light a fire on top of
them, and thus they delivered their souls into the hand of God, and they received crowns of
martyrdom from our Lord Jesus Christ.
And on this day also died the holy woman Tekla (Thecla) who was a martyr without the
shedding of blood. This holy woman had parents, who were rich and honorable
Macedonians, and they brought her up strictly according to the custom of their country;
now they worshipped idols. When Paul arrived in the country of Macedonia, he began to
preach in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, saying, “Blessed are those who are poor for
righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who have a
wife and who are as if they had not one, for they shall inherit everlasting life”--these and
such like words. When Saint Thecla heard these words, she remained in the upper floor of
her house and only came down for food and drink. And her mother said unto her, “Why
dost thou not come down form the upper floor of thy house, and why dost thou not eat?”
And she came down from the upper floor of her house, and went to Paul secretly, and she
bribed the doorkeeper of her house with her hair-comb of gold not to talk about her
[leaving the house]. When Paul saw her he received her gladly and taught her the Faith of
Christ. On the following day when her mother came to Paul she found Thecla sitting with
him, and she went to the governor and reported to him that her daughter was a Christian.
And the governor commanded his soldiers to bring Thecla with Paul, and when they had
brought her he was wroth with Paul and ordered them to cast him into the fire; [and they
did so] but God delivered him. And the governor commanded them to cast Thecla into the
fire, and all the children of the city assembled to look upon her torture. And without the
use of force on the part of the soldiers she threw herself into the flames after having made
over herself the sign of the Cross; and she went forth from the midst of the fire, which had
not touched her. And she went to Paul, and shaved off her hair, and girded herself with a
belt and followed Paul. When another governor heard this he seized her and pressed her to
abandon the Christian Faith, and when she refused he cast her into a den of lions and bears,
and these animals bowed down before her and licked the dust off her feet. When the
governor and those who were with him saw that life was hers, they believed and were
baptized in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. And Thecla continued
to follow Paul, and to preach in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; and having worked
many miracles she died in peace.
On this day also died Saint Antilarius. This holy man was an officer of the tax-gatherers,
and he had no mercy on anyone. One day certain poor folk were sitting in the sun, and
they began to mention the names of the charitable and the avaricious, and they mentioned
54

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the name of Antilarius as that of a man who had never bestowed any alms on any one of
them. And one of the poor said, “What will ye give me if I succeed in drawing a gift from
him?” And they promised to give him something. And the needy man went to Antilarius
and begged for alms from him, and Antilarius wanted to throw a stone at him in great
wrath, but as he had no stone he threw at him the piece of bread-crust, which was left, in
his hand. And taking this the beggar went to his companions, and told them that he had
received alms from Antilarius. And Antilarius had a dream, and in it he saw himself at the
Judgment, and certain black men were disputing concerning him, and there were other men
there who were white; now their faces were austere, and they said, “We cannot find
attributed to him any alms except the piece of bread-crust”; and when the speaker cast the
bread into the scales it balanced exactly all his sins. When he awoke from his sleep he
distributed all his possessions among the poor and he departed to Jerusalem where he sold
himself for three dinars, and [he gave away] in alms the price of his sale, and he lived and
served like a slave. And when the slaves of his lord caused him sorrow, a shining man
appeared unto him, and said unto him, “Sorrow not, for I have received the price of thy
sale, and behold it is here in my hand.” When certain men who had come from his city
revealed what he had done, he fled secretly and came to the gates of the city, the keeper of
which was deaf and dumb. When Antilarius said unto him, “Open the gates to me,” there
went forth from his mouth something which was like unto fire, and the ears of the gatekeeper were opened, and he spoke with his mouth, and he opened the gates to Antilarius
who went forth into the desert and died there. When the people missed him, the gatekeeper
told them all that had happened, and they marveled at his holiness and at his admirable
behavior.
And on this day also died Abba John of Debra Tsege. This holy man by means of
excessive fasting, and prayers, and vigil made his body emaciated, and he became like a
dried clod of earth. One day when certain men poured over him a cupful of water, because
of the excessive dryness of his skin he left only unabsorbed a very small portion of it.
Glory to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 28
(October 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Abadir and his sister Ira became martyrs. This holy man was a son of
the brother of Basilides, commander-in-chief of the royal army of Antioch. Now ‘Abadir
succeeded his father as commander-in-chief, and he had a mansion wherein he used to
pray. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him at midnight, and He said unto him,
“Rise up, and take thy sister ‘Ira’Iand get thee into the land of Egypt so that thou mayest
receive a crown of martyrdom. And I will command a certain man whose name is Samuel
to take care about your bodies, and he shall prepare them for burial”; and He gave him a
benediction and went up into heaven with great glory. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared
unto his sister “Ira’I also, and He said unto her, “Hearken unto the voice of thy brother, and
do not transgress his command.” When she woke from her sleep she trembled
exceedingly, and she went to her brother and told him how our Lord Jesus Christ had
55

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
appeared unto her, and how He had spoken unto her, and she rejoiced exceedingly; and she
agree with her brother not to transgress that command. And they swore to each other that
they would go to the land of Egypt, and that they would pour out their blood for the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise! When the mother of the blessed ‘Abadir
knew this thing, she rent her garments, she and her handmaidens, and they came to ‘Abadir
and wept before him, and she adjured him not to become a martyr. And he swore unto her
that he would not speak to Diocletian concerning martyrdom, and her heart became quiet,
and she ceased from sorrow, and she did not think that he would go to another place to
become a martyr. And Saint ‘Abadir changed his apparel that night, and he went forth
from his house, and he drew water secretly for those who were shut up in the prison house,
until the dawn came. And he commanded the keeper of the gate of the city not to tell this
matter to anyone whatsoever, and he said unto him, “If thou revealest this matter to anyone
I will cut off your hand with the sword.” After this [our Lord Christ] appeared unto him
again, and He commanded him to go to Egypt and to become a martyr; and straightway
saint ‘Abadir rose up, and took his sister ‘Ira’I and they departed to the land of Egypt, and
they arrived in the city of Alexandria. And some of the soldiers knew him, and they said
unto him, “Thou art our Lord ‘Abadir, the commander-in-chief.” And ‘Abadir smiled and
said unto them, “Many people tell me this, and I say unto them, I am not ‘Abadir, but only
someone like unto him.” And again in another place some soldiers recognized him, and
they said unto him, “Thou art ‘Abadir,” and ‘Abadir said unto them, “I certainly am not
‘Abadir.” Then they went forth from the city of Alexandria and came to the city of Great
Mesr (Grand Cairo), and they found Saint ‘Abkarazun there, and ‘Abadir knew
‘Abkarazun and blessed him. Then he came to the city of Eshmunen, and foregathered
with Samuel the deacon. And on the following day Samuel went with them to the city of
‘Ensena, and they confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before Arianus, governor of Antinoe,
and he tortured them severely. And the holy man ‘Abadir prayed and entreated God to
strengthen his faith and the faith of his sister ‘Ira’I during the torturing. And God took the
soul of his sister and carried it to the Jerusalem, which is in the heavens, and she saw the
habitation of the martyrs and of the righteous; then He brought her soul back into her
body. When the governor was tired of torturing them, he commanded his soldiers to cut
off their heads with the sword. And before they cut off their heads Arianus the governor
said unto Saint ‘Abadir, “I adjure thee by thy God to inform me whom thou art, and what
is thy name, and whence comest thou.” And ‘Abadir said unto him, “Swear unto me that
thou wilt not change the decree which thou hast decreed in respect of cutting off my head”;
and the governor swore unto him even as the holy man had said. And the holy man
answered and said unto him, “I am ‘Abadir, the commander-in-chief of the army.” And
Arianus the governor cried out, saying, “Woe is me, O my lord, it is meet that I should die
before thee. Why didst thou not make me to know that thou wast my lord, instead of
hiding thyself from me and permitting me to go so far as to condemn thee to all these
severe tortures?” And Saint ‘Abadir answered and said unto him, “Fear not, for thou art
about to receive a crown of martyrdom. The emperor will seek for me and will not find
me, and he will hear that thou hast killed me, and he will punish thee with very great
severity, and thou wilt die for the sake of the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And now,
make speed to finish our martyrdoms.” And straightway the governor commanded his
soldiers to cut off the heads of ‘Abadir and his sister, and they cut off their heads; and the
saints received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And [the believers]
spread out fine apparel, and wrapped up their bodies therein, and Samuel the deacon took
56

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them and laid them in his house until the days of the persecution were ended; and he built a
fine church for them, and many signs and wonders took place through their bodies.
Three salutations to ‘Abadir and his sister.
And on this day also died Sosena. The father of this holy woman was Chelcias (Helkiah),
and she was the wife of Joachim, a Jewish nobleman, and one of those who had been
carried away captive into Babylon; and all his kinsmen used to come to him to judge their
causes. Now Sosena was exceedingly beautiful and she feared God, and her righteous
parents taught their daughter the Law of Moses. And she had a fruit-garden (orchard),
which belonged to her husband, and she used to go at noon and walk about therein. And in
those days there appeared two Rabbans who were hypocrites, such as God spoke of [when
He said] “Sin went forth from Babylon through hypocritical Rabbans who said, Let us
protect the people”; and these men frequented the house of Joachim. When they saw
Sosena walking in the garden they lusted for her, and their hearts went astray and they
turned their eyes perversely to her, and they remembered not the judgment of God. Both
loved her and both wished to lie with her, but neither told to the other what was in his
heart, for they were afraid to declare their lust. And they waited the whole day long to find
her, and one of them acting craftily towards his fellow said, “Let us go to our houses for it
is the time of evening.” And they passed out [of the garden] and separated from each other
and told each other of their desire, and they agreed together upon a time when each would
find her [alone], and then they waited for her. And on a day according to her wont, she
came with two of her handmaidens, and she wished to bathe in the garden because she was
heated and there was no one in the garden. Now the two old men had hidden themselves
and they were awaiting her. And she said unto her handmaidens, “Let them bring to me
the oil and the soap wherewith to wash myself, and let them shut the doors.” And when her
handmaidens were departed, the two Rabbans rose up, and seized her, and they said unto
her, “We wish to lie with thee, and if thou refusest we will be witnesses against thee that
we found a man with thee.” And Sosena wept, and said, “I am in affliction in every way:
If I do [what ye want] I shall die, and if I do not I cannot be saved. It is better for me to
fall into the hand of God than to sin before Him.” And Sosena uttered a cry at the top of
her voice, and the Rabbans cried out at her, and one of them ran and opened the doors of
the garden. When the cries were heard by the members of her house they all ran out and
came by way of a side door, and they saw what had happened. And when the Rabbans had
told them this matter, all the servants of her house were ashamed, for such a thing had
never been heard in connection with Sosena. On the following day all the people gathered
together to Joachim, and these two Rabbans came with their hearts of violence, and they
declared before all the people, laying their hands upon her head as they did so, “We were
walking alone in the garden, and this woman came with two of her handmaidens, and they
shut the doors of the garden; and she sent her handmaidens away, and there came out a
young man from the place in which he had hidden, and lay with her. And when we ran
after him we could not catch him, for the door was open and he had gone out; we seized
Sosena, but when we asked her she would not tell us his name.” And the bystanders
believed them because they were Rabbans of the people. And Sosena who was weeping,
and whose heart trusted in God, looked up to heaven, and cried out with a loud voice,
saying, “O God of the world, Thou knowest that they have laid false information against
me, and I, behold, I must die, although I have not committed [the sin].” And God heard
her petition, and whilst they were carrying her away to kill her, the Spirit of God moved a
certain young man called Daniel, and he cried out, saying, “I am innocent of this woman’s
57

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
blood.” And they said unto him, “What is the meaning of these words?” And he said unto
them, “Are ye fools that ye condemn a daughter of Israel to death without making any
investigation [of the charge against her]?” And when the council had come back unto the
synagogue, they had the two Rabbans brought, and set each at a distance from the other.
And Daniel said unto one of them, “By what kind of a tree didst thou see her?” And he
said “under a sakinon tree,” and the other Rabban said “under a perwon tree.” And Daniel
condemned them by their own words, and the people blessed God Who had saved Sosena,
the daughter of Chelcias (Helkiah); and they slew those two Rabbans according to the Law
of Moses.
And on this day also are commemorated ‘Erani (Irene) the martyr, and ‘Ankuo Maryam,
and Stephen his son, and Hannah, and Porphyrina, and Luke the monk.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Meskerem 29
(October 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the festival of the birth of our Lord Redeemer Jesus Christ
by Mary, the Holy Virgin.
Salutation to the birth of the Flower, Jesus Christ.
And on this day also took place the translation of the body of Saint John the evangelist and
apostle, the proclaimer of the Deity.
Salutation to the translation of the body of Saint John the evangelist.
And on this day also became martyrs the holy virgin ‘Arsima, and Agatha, and the two
virgins who followed them, and many men; and the number of them all was two and
seventy souls. Now when Diocletian the infidel was reigning he sought out a maiden of
beautiful appearance to marry her. And he commanded certain painters to depart into
every country, and to choose for him a maiden of beautiful form and appearance, and they
were to paint a picture of her on a tablet for him, and show him all her limb and her
movements. When those painters arrived in the city of Rome they discovered a certain
nunnery, and they found therein this virgin ‘Arsima; and there was in the nunnery none
like unto her in her appearance, and there was none who resembled her. And the painters
painted a portrait of her and sent it to the Emperor Diocletian. When the emperor saw her
portrait he rejoiced exceedingly. And he sent to the kings and governors and bade them
come to him for the marriage. When the virgins knew this thing, they wept, and they rose
up and went forth from that nunnery entreating God to help them, and to keep them in their
virginity; and they came to the country of Armenia, and entered the royal city of Dertades
the king. And they dwelt in a certain village camp of nomads in a plain, and their number
was five and seventy men and women, besides the nine and thirty virgins. And they dwelt
in great tribulation, and they could not find food, and one of them made a . . . and used to
feed them by means of the work thereof. When Diocletian sought after ‘Arsima he found
58

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
her not. And he heard that she was in the country of Armenia, “Take care of her and send
her to me.” When the virgins heard these words they hid themselves in another city, but
certain men went and gave information to the king about them, and Dertades commanded
his soldiers to bring the virgin ‘Arsima to him with great honor; and when she did not wish
to go to him, they dragged her and forced her to come to him. When Dertades saw the
beauty of the holy woman he wanted to defile her virginity, but he was not able to do so.
And he brought her mother Agatha to her to persuade her to be submissive to the king’s
command. And when her mother came to her she besought her to endure patiently, and
she comforted her, and she exhorted her, and told her and taught her that she must not
forsake her true Bridegroom, Who is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, and
that she must not defile her virginity with a filthy pagan and a stranger. When Dertades
heard that she had persuaded her daughter to endure patiently, he commanded his soldiers
to break the teeth of Agatha her mother. And God gave to the holy woman ‘Arsima power
and strength over Dertades, the king, and she hurled him backwards, and dragged him
along. Now Dertades was well known in battle, for he was exceedingly strong, and the
king was put to shame having been vanquished by the virgin ‘Arsima; and he commanded
his soldiers to cut off the head of Saint ‘Arsima. And the soldiers came and dragged her
away with ropes, and they cut off her head, and tore out her tongue, and put out her eyes,
and they cut off her limbs and hacked her body to pieces. When the king awoke from his
fall, and his senses returned to him, he repented the killing of Saint ‘Arsima; and when he
knew that she was dead he commanded his soldiers to slay all the [other] virgins. And the
soldiers came and bored holes in the soles of their feet, and they flayed them, and cast
them out [to the beasts]. Now there was one of them who was sick and was lying on her
bed, and she cried out to the soldiers and they came to her, and cut off her head with one
blow. Thus they all received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And
they slew all the men who had come with them from the city of Rome, and the number
thereof was two and seventy souls; and their bodies were cast out into the desert. After the
death of these martyrs a certain devil took possession of the king, and he continued to
punish him until Saint Gregory came to him, and prayed over him, and he was healed of
his pain immediately, and he believed in Christ. And they took the bodies of the holy
martyrs, and laid them in a holy place until the days of the persecution were ended; and a
beautiful church was [then] built for them, and signs and great wonders took place through
them.
Salutation to Arsima.
Salutation to John the Baptist.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

59

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Meskerem 30
(October 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the great commemoration which our Lord and
Redeemer Jesus Christ made for the holy and honorable Abba Atnatewos (Athanasius) the
apostle, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. Now at that time the emperor was
Constantine the Less, son of Constantine the Great, who denied the One Son, and separated
the Godhead of His Father; and he believed in the faith of Arius, the accursed one, and
supported his views. And the emperor sent a certain man whose name was Gergewos to
the country of Egypt, and he gave him five hundred horsemen; and he wrote for him a
letter [to take] with him authorizing him to become Archbishop of Alexandria, and the
head of all the country of Egypt, and of all archbishops and bishops. And he ordered
Gergewos to support the faith of Arius, and to slay all those who believed in Christ, and
those who were obedient unto Him. When Gergewos, the accursed, had arrived in the city
of Alexandria he preached his infidelity, but only a very few of the men of Alexandria
accepted his words and his polluted preaching. Therefore he killed all the believing men of
the city of Alexandria, that is to say a large and innumerable collection of people; and
Saint ‘Atnatewos (Athanasius) fled and hid himself for a period of six years. At the end of
this time he came forth and went to the city of Constantinople, to the Emperor Constantine
the Less, who denied the Son of God, Whose Name be blessed! And he said unto him,
“Either restore me to my see, or slay me and let me receive the crown of life of
martyrdom.” When the emperor heard these words from him he commanded his soldiers
to place the archbishop in a small boat, and to supply him neither with bread nor water, nor
with a captain for the boat, and to drive him forth to sea. Now the emperor thought within
himself that Saint ‘Atnatewos (Athanasius) would die at sea, either through the foundering
of his boat or through hunger and thirst; and the emperor was afraid of him, and [he did
this] so that the saint might not rebuke him according as the emperor had commanded.
Now although the emperor had not given him bread and water, behold the saint had with
him the bread of God, which was from heaven, and the water of life, which flowed down
from Him. And although he had no captain in the ship with him, behold, he had with him
in the ship He, Who directeth the heaven and the earth by His Word. And the boat wherein
Saint ‘Atnatewos (Athanasius) was seated traveled along smoothly and in peace, and the
angels bore it along on their wings, and on the third day he arrived in the city of
Alexandria. When the believing folk heard that their good shepherd had arrived, they went
out to meet him and they welcomed him with lighted lamps, and songs of joy and
instruments of music, and they praised God and brought him into the church; and
Gergewos the infidel and those who were with him went forth there from. And on that day
Saint ‘Atnatewos (Athanasius) made a great festival to God--blessed be His Name! And it
was then as now, and they celebrated the festival regularly. Praise be unto God, Who
honoureth His chosen one with this honor.
And on this day also they commemorate Saint Gregory, Archbishop of the country of
Armenia.
And on this day also took place the calling of James and John, the sons of Zebedee, and on
it the martyrs Abba Bula (Pawle), and Maryu, and Petros (Peter), and ‘Asotares [are
commemorated].
60

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Salutation to the great teachers of Debra Maryam, ‘Absadi and ‘Aaron of Galilee. [This
paragraph is wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also died Abba Shalusi. This holy man was an athlete, and pretended to
be mad, and his fasting and his praying were in secret, and before men he neither prayed
nor fasted. Each morning he used to prepare for himself a small amount of food made of
herbs of the desert, and at eventide he ate nothing with the brethren. Now the
Archimandrite was Abba Isaac. And all the monks used to marvel at him, but Abba Isaac
did not wish him to continue this habit so that he might not cause himself to fall sick. One
day there was about to be a festival in the monastery, and Abba Isaac said unto the monks,
“Watch him this day and see that he doth not eat before he receiveth the Offering.” When
the time for the meal arrived Abba Shalusi wished to separate himself from them, and the
monks prevented him from doing so; and he cried out and said unto them, “Let me alone,
that I may not die of hunger, and that my transgression may not be on your heads.” And
when they would not pay any heed to his cry, he brought out his skull-cap and beat the
wall of the church with it, saying, “Mary, my Lady, deliver me from these monks.” And
the wall split asunder, and he passed out through the opening, and then the wall joined
itself again and became as it was before it split open. And when those who were
assembled there saw this wonder they cried out, saying, “Kiryalayson” (Kyrie eleeson)
three hundred times. And they found the skullcap that had been thrown out, and they
placed it in the church with great honor, and it remained there and worked miracles and
healed the sick. When the archbishop heard about it he wished to take away the skullcap
so that he might be blessed thereby, and each time he took it away it returned to the
monastery. Now this happened three times. And this monk after many days like this day
died in the desert.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

61

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE SECOND MONTH
TEKEMT 01
(October 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy woman Anastasia became a martyr. This woman was a fighter; she
was a native of Rome and her parents were Christians. They brought her up in all honor,
and trained her in a manner befitting her noble rank, and they taught her everything, which
was beneficial for her soul and body, and also the doctrine of the Church. When she
arrived at woman’s estate her parents wanted to give her in marriage, but she did not desire
this thing, for from her youth up she had craved for the garb of the ascetic life; and she
chose the spiritual fight which is the garb of the holy ascetic life. And she entered one of
the nunneries where virgins were received in the city of Rome, and she put on the nun’s
garb, which is the garb of angels. And she made her body to toil with the labor of constant
prayer, and with strenuous contending, and with hunger, and with thirst, and with cutting
out from her heart and soul every thought concerning this world. In those days she used to
fast the whole of every second day throughout the whole year. And during the great fast of
the Forty Days she did not eat except on the first Sabbath (Saturday) and on the first day of
the week (Sunday) after the mid-day prayer. In those days her food was dry bread and salt,
and during all the days of her life as a nun she never ate any food, which had been cooked
by fire. Now there was another nunnery of virgins near her nunnery, and the day of the
festival in the nunnery approached. On that day the abbess took certain virgins from the
nunnery, and among them was this virgin Anastasia, and they went to celebrate the festival
in the neighboring nunnery. As they were going along the road this holy virgin saw some
soldiers of the Emperor Decius, and with them were certain Christians whom they were
dragging along. And her heart became inflamed with spiritual love, and she cursed them,
saying, “O men of sluggish hearts, and infidels, why do ye act thus towards those whom
God hath created in His own form and image, and for whom He hath given Himself?”
Having said these words the soldiers were wroth with her, and they seized her, and brought
her before the governor. And the governor asked her, saying, “Is it true that thou art a
Christian, and that thou worshippest Him that was crucified?” And she confessed Christ
before the governor and did not deny Him. Then the governor tortured her with severe
tortures; he heaped fire on her body, and then he hung her up head downwards, and had a
fire lighted under her; but although she was suffering great torture she did not turn from
her faith. And after this the governor commanded his soldiers to cut off her head with the
sword; and those who were there marveled at the fortitude of her soul. And she prayed a
long prayer, and she stretched out her head to the sword, and they cut off the head of Saint
Anastasia, and she received a crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Haritan (Cheriton), and Susannah the virgin,
and Mary the sister of Lazarus.
Glory be to God forever. Amen.

62

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TEKEMT 02
(October 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the great Saint Abba Severus, Archbishop of Antioch, came to the country of
Egypt; now this took place in the days of the Emperor Eustathius, who was a wicked
emperor. And the empress was a woman holding the right Faith, and she loved Abba
Severus, and she placed in him very great confidence; but the emperor did not turn from
his evil counsel and he wanted to kill Abba Severus. When the God-loving empress knew
that the king wished to kill Abba Severus secretly, she besought the holy man to save
himself, but he did not want to go away, and he said unto her, “I am ready to die for the
sake of my Lord Jesus Christ.” And the empress urged him with many fervent entreaties,
and certain God-loving brethren entreated him also, and he went forth from that city; and
certain of the brethren who were with him fled to Lower Egypt. When the emperor had
sought for him and had found him not, he sent soldiers to seek him out and to bring him to
him. And God hid him from them, and they found him not, and yet he was nigh unto them,
and he walked about in their midst and they did not see him when he was in that place
wherein the soldiers of the emperor lived. When Abba Severus came to Egypt he went
about secretly from place to place and from monastery to monastery, and God wrought by
him great signs and wonders. One day he arrived in the desert of Scete, and he entered into
the church of Saint Abba Macarius in the guise of a traveling monk, and at that moment
the priest was offering the incense of sacrifice at the altar, and he was censing the people.
Afterwards he read the Book of the Gospel, and then he lifted off the covering and looked
for the Offering on the paten, but it was hidden from him and he could not find it. And he
wept, “O my brethren, I know not whether this thing hath happened because of some sin of
mine, or because of some sin of yours, but I cannot find the Offering on the paten, and It is
hidden from me”; and the people wept because of this. And straightway the angel of the
Lord appeared unto the priest, and said unto him, “This hath not happened because of thy
sin, and this Offering hath not disappeared because of the sin of the people, but because
thou hast acted stupidly, for thou hast dared to offer up incense and our Offering whilst the
Archbishop Abba Severus is standing outside the sanctuary in a corner of the church.”
And the priest said unto the angel, “Where is he?” And the angel pointed with his hand
towards him, and he knew Abba Severus by the grace of the Holy Spirit. When the priest
came to him Abba Severus commanded him to finish the service of the Offering. After
this the priest brought Abba Severus to the sanctuary with great honor. And when the
priest had gone up to the altar he found the Offering on the paten as before, and the priests
marveled and praised God. After this Abba Severus went forth from that place and came
to the city of Seha, and he dwelt there with a certain rich man who was a lover of God, and
whose name was Dorotheus; and he lived with him until he died on the twenty-fourth day
of the month of Yakatit.
And on this day are commemorated Takla Sama’et and Heriacus (Cyriacus?).
Glory be to God Who is wonderous in His Saints. Amen.

63

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TEKEMT 03
(October 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Simeon, the fifty-first archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This father was the son of one of the elders of the city of Alexandria, and his
parents were Orthodox Christians. From his earliest childhood he sucked the milk of the
Orthodox Faith, and he learned the doctrine of the Church. And he determined within
himself to assume the monastic garb, and he went out from the city of Alexandria and
departed to the desert of Scete, and he became a monk in the monastery of Abba Jacob,
who was archbishop before him. And he dwelt with him many days, and he made his body
to be emaciated through the strenuousness of his ascetic exercises, and by his excessive
contending. And when Abba Macarius, the second of the name, was appointed archbishop,
he received from Abba Jacob the story of his bold strife, and of the strenuousness of his
ascetic practices, and he dwelt with him until Abba Jacob his father died. And he chose
many priests, and the bishops and priests and deacons assembled together, and all the
elders, and Divine Love moved them, and they made this holy father Abba Simeon
archbishop because they saw the excellences of his natural disposition and character.
When they saw that he had dwelt with the two archbishops who preceded him, they seized
him, and they made him archbishop on the throne of Saint Mark, apostle and evangelist. In
administering his see he followed the Divine path, and he was well pleasing unto God, and
he protected his people in the keeping of the Law of the Right Faith. During the days of
his rule the Church was quiet and at peace. And this father fell sick of a grievous disease
in his foot, and he entreated God to give him rest from the pain thereof; he only remained
in his office for five months and a half, and he died in peace.
And on this day the new Saint George became a martyr.
And on this day also are commemorated Nineveh and its people and its tribes, and
Macarius, and Theophilus, and Eumara, and Gregory, bishop of Armenia, and Saint
Theodora, the daughter of the Emperor Arcadius, the son of Theodosius the Great.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 04
(October 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT, ONE
GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Bacchus and his companion Saint Sergius became martyrs by the hands
of the wicked Antiochus, governor of Syria. Now this took place when the Emperor
Maximianus seized these saints, and tortured them with sever tortures after he had cast off
their belts, for they were soldiers. After this he sent them to the country of Syria, to
Antiochus the governor, who shut Saint Bacchus and Saint Sergius up in prison. And he
commanded his soldiers to hang him up and to hack him with knives, and to hang stones
about his neck, and to cast him into the River Euphrates; and they did to him according as
64

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the king commanded. And God protected the body of Saint Bacchus, and brought it
through the sea to the coast. And there were near him two anchorites and ascetics, the
name of the one being Mama, and that of the other Baba, and unto those brethren the angel
of the Lord appeared and commanded them to go and carry away the body of Saint
Bacchus. And they went according as the angel of the Lord commanded them, and they
found the body of Saint Bacchus, and by the side of it were a lion and wolves protecting it.
And these animals which were wont to eat only the flesh of men and animals had sat by it
for one day and one night, and they had been commanded by God Most High to protect the
body of Saint Bacchus. And these holy men took up the body of the saint with great
honor, and they sang hymns before it until they came to their cave where they buried it.
Salutation to Bacchus, and Baba, and Mama.
And on this day Saint Ananias, the preacher, one of the two and seventy disciples, became
a martyr. This holy man was Bishop of Damascus, and it was he who baptized the Apostle
Paul, our Lord having appeared to him on the road to Damascus, and it was he whom the
Apostles appointed bishop, and who was sent by them to the city of Damascus. He had at
first dwelt and preached in the house of Gabriel. And he healed very many sick people,
and converted many to the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. After he had baptized Paul the
Apostle Lucianus the governor seized him and flogged him with leather whips until his
blood flowed down to the ground. And they beat his temples with iron rods, and they
burnt his breast with torches of fire. After this they took him outside the city, and the
governor ordered his soldiers to stone him, and they stoned him, and he delivered up his
soul into the hand of God.
And on this day also are commemorated the righteous saints Romanus, and Gabra Krestos,
and John the eunuch, and the consecration of the church of Senhar.
Salutation to Gabra Krestos.
And on this day also is commemorated the death of the kings ‘Abreha and ‘Asbeha who
reigned together over ‘Aksum in Ethiopia. Salutation to kings ‘Abreha and ‘Asbeha.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 05
(October 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT, ONE
GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Paul, Archbishop of Constantinople. This holy man
was a disciple of Abba Alexander, Archbishop of Constantinople, his predecessor, and
when Abba Alexander died this father was appointed in his stead. When he had taken his
seat on the archiepiscopal throne, he excommunicated the Arians and expelled them from
Constantinople and from the whole district. When the Emperor Constantine died, his son
Constantine reigned over Constantinople, and his brother reigned over the city of Rome;
now this Constantine loved Arius, and he believed his polluted belief. When the emperor
heard that Saint Abba Paul had excommunicated the Arians, and had exiled them from the
65

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
city of Constantinople, he was exceedingly sorry, and he said unto Saint Paul,
“Henceforward let the Arians alone, and excommunicate them not.” And the archbishop
did not obey his words, and therefore Constantine was wroth with him, and he exiled him
from the city of Constantinople, just as he had exiled Abba Athanasius from the city of
Alexandria before him. And the two archbishops Paul and Athanasius foregathered in the
city of Rome with Saint Abba Julius, the Archbishop of the city of Rome, who accorded
them a splendid and a loving reception. And he wrote for them a letter to the Emperor
Constantine, and he said concerning them, “They are learned, and righteous and Orthodox
men, and it is meet for thee to receive them and to honor them.” When the Archbishops
Abba Paul and Abba Athanasius had arrived in the city of Constantinople, and the emperor
had read the letter of the Archbishop of the city of Rome, he was afraid of them, and he
received them and placed them in their offices, and waited to deal with them for a few
days, and after this he exiled them. And they returned to the city of Rome, to the
Archbishop Abba Julius, and they told him how Constantine had treated them, and how he
had exiled them a second time. And Julius took them and brought them to the Emperor
Kuenseta (Constans), the brother of Constantine, and told him how his brother had treated
them. And Kuenseta (Constans) wrote a letter to his brother, and commanded him to
receive them, and he said unto him, “If thou dost not receive them there will be no peace
betwixt thee and me, henceforward.” And the archbishop also wrote unto him a second
letter, and Constantine accepted the letter of his brother Kuenseta (Constans) and the letter
of the archbishop, and he set the two archbishops in their offices. When certain men slew
the Emperor Kuenseta (Constans) in the city of Rome, his brother Constantine turned, and
he exiled Saint Paul to the country of Armenia, and shut him up in prison there for a few
days. Then the Emperor Constantine sent a letter to one of the followers of Arius, and he
said unto him, “Kill Paul in the prison house.” And that man who was an infidel came to
the holy man by night, and strangled him, and he died in peace; and all the days of his life
were forty years.
And on this day died Saint Cyriacus the martyr and Hannah his mother; now he was
condemned to death by Elianus (the Emperor Julian according to the Bodleian ms.)
because he was a bishop. When he confessed Christ, Elianus commanded his soldiers to
cut off his right hand, saying, “This is thy hand wherewith thou writest, and wherewith
thou dost prevent men from worshipping idols”; and Saint Cyriacus said, “Thou hast done
well, O thou dog lacking understanding.” When Elianus heard this he commanded his
soldiers to boil some lead and to pour it into his mouth, and he made them lay him upon a
red-hot iron bed. And they strewed over him red-hot burning coals, and they rubbed salted
fat into him, and they beat his belly and his back with rods until his bones broke. And the
righteous man endured these tortures patiently, and he prayed in the Hebrew tongue,
saying. [Here follows a transcript into Ethiopic letter of fifteen words in which the saint
beseeches Adonai, the God of Death, to keep death from him.] Then Elianus commanded
them to release him, and he lay him down in the prison house. And Elianus made them
bring Hannah, the mother of Cyriacus, and he commanded them to suspend her by her hair,
and to scrape her with shards for three hours. And he also commanded them to burn her
body with fiery torches, and whilst praying she delivered up her soul. Then Elianus
commanded them to bring Saint Cyriacus, and to cast him into a large pit wherein were
serpent and vipers, but none of them injured him. And when ‘Admon (Admonius), whom
Hannah had saved for Christ, saw this he cursed the king and reviled his gods; and
forthwith Elianus commanded them to cut off his head with the sword. And the holy man
stretched out his neck, saying, “O God of Cyriacus, receive my soul”; and he finished his
66

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
martyrdom. And Elianus commanded his soldiers to cast Saint Cyriacus into a vessel of
boiling oil, and he also commanded them to drive a spear through his breast, and thus he
ended his testimony and died in peace on the day of the Sabbath.
Salutation of Cyriacus, who informed the Empress Helena concerning the place where the
Cross was to be found; the knowledge of this place he had obtained from his father.
Salutation to Hannah the martyr, and salutation to ‘Admon (Admonius).
And on this day are commemorated James the apostle, the son of Alphaeus, and “Adrawos,
and ‘Awaras, and ‘Aldrakwos the martyrs, and ‘Endronos (‘Adronos?).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 06
(October 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT, ONE
GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and righteous woman Hannah, the prophetess - mother of Samuel
the prophet. This holy woman was of the tribe of Levi, and Elkanah, the son of Tarhem
(Jeroham) married her, now he had another wife whose name was Penana (Peninnah), but
Hannah could not bear children because she was barren. And Peninnah was always
reviling Hannah because of her failure to have children, and because she was barren. And
Hannah wept and would neither eat nor drink, and Elkanah her husband tried to comfort
her, but she would not receive comfort from him. And she went up into the house of God
in the days of Eli the priest, and prayed and wept before God, and vowed a vow to God,
saying, “O God, if thou wilt give me a son, I will dedicate him to Thee.” And Eli the priest
was watching her as she stood praying, and making supplication silently, for she was
praying in her heart; and Eli the priest thought that she was drunk with wine, and he was
wroth with her, and he rebuked her and said unto her, “Why dost thou drink wine, and
come hither to the house of God?” And she said unto him, “I have not been drinking wine
at all, I am suffering, but in my heart, because I have no son.” And Eli the priest
comforted her, and blessed her, saying, “Go in peace; the God of Israel shall grant thee thy
petition”; and she believed his word, and she went to her husband, and she conceived and
brought forth a son, and she called his name “Samuel,” which is, being interpreted, “God
hath heard me.” And when she had taken him from the breasts, she took him up to the
house of the Lord, even as she had vowed, and she brought him to Eli the priest, and made
him to know that she was the woman who had prayed to God and entreated Him to give
her a son. And she said, “Behold, God hath heard my petition and hath given me this son;
and behold, I have brought him to God so that he may minister in His house all the days of
his life.” Then she praised God in that well-known hymn of praise, which is the third of
the hymns that are written at the end of the Psalms of David the prophet. And she lived
after this and was well pleasing unto God, and she died in peace.
Salutation to Hannah.

67

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day died Saint Abba Pantaleon of the cell. This holy man was the son of noble
folk, who were among the great ones of Rome, and who sat on the right hand of the
emperor. When his mother had weaned him she took him to a monastery where he grew
up in wisdom and exhortation, and fasting and prayer. Then he traveled to the country of
Ethiopia with Nine Saints in the days of ‘Al’ameda the king, the son of Sal’Adab the king,
and they lived in Bet Katin. Then they separated, and Abba Pantaleon went up to the top
of a little mountain, and he made himself a cell which was five cubits long, and two cubits
wide, and three cubits deep; its roof was a single stone, and it had no door, but only a small
opening. And he stood on his feet for a period of five and forty years, without sitting
down, and without lying down to sleep. He ate and drank so little that his skin cleaved to
his bones, and his eyelashes were worn away by his tears. And he continued to work
innumerable miracles in healing the sick and in opening the eyes of the blind. One day he
planted a tree at dawn and by the time the evening came it had grown very tall, and had
dried up, and his disciple had prepared (?) it and burned it, and tied up the charcoal in his
garment and taken it for the censer. When Caleb was going forth to wage war against
another king, he came to Abba Pantaleon and embraced his cell, and told him his trouble.
And Abba Pantaleon said, “Go in peace, for God is able to do all things, and He shall give
thee victory over thy enemy”; and to return safely and in peace. When Caleb the king had
come to the country of Saba, he made war on the people thereof, and he slew them all and
conquered them, and there were not left any who were not scattered like leaves. And all
those who saw Saint Abba Pantaleon testified concerning him, saying, “We saw Abba
Pantaleon standing with us in battle, and he was overthrowing our enemies.” When Caleb
the king returned, having conquered the King of Judah, he forsook his kingdom, and
became a monk with Abba Pantaleon. When Saint Abba Pantaleon had finished his strife,
our Lord Jesus Christ came to him and made a covenant with him concerning him that
should call upon his name, and celebrate his commemoration, and write an account of his
contending; and He said unto him, “It is now sufficient for thee; go to thy rest.” And
straightway his bones broke and he died in peace and was buried in his cell.
Salutation to Abba Pantaleon as the perfect man.
Salutation, twofold, to Abba Pantaleon who caused the death of 5050 warriors in the battle.
Salutation to Abba Pantaleon in his cell.
And on this day also the saints Rewak and Antonius, Bishop of Bana, became martyrs.
Salutation to the same.
And on this day also is commemorated Habakkuk the prophet, the interpretation of which
name is “Teacher.” This holy man was of the tribe of Simeon. Joseph begat Yosafet. He
saw and prophesied before the Captivity that the King of Babylon and his soldiers would
surround Jerusalem and destroy the Temple; and he wept much and groaned greatly
because thereof. When Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon came to Jerusalem and
besieged it, this righteous man fled to the country of Mestirakina, and he departed seeking
for the land of Ishmael. And when the captives returned from the city of the Chaldeans,
that is to say, those who had gone thither from the city of Jerusalem and from Egypt, this
righteous man was living in his own habitation, and was ministering unto those who were
gathering in the harvest from the fields. When he had taken food to carry to the reapers, he
spake unto the men of his house, saying, “I am obliged to go to a city which is afar, but I
will return speedily. If I tarry, take some food for the reapers and carry it to them.” And
68

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
as he was going along having with him the food which he was to carry to the reapers,
straightway the angel of God seized him by the hair of his head, whilst the food was still
with him, and brought him to the cave of the city of Babylon wherein Daniel the prophet
lived, now he was lying down before the lions, and Habakkuk brought the food to him and
he ate. Then the angel took him by his hand and brought him back to the land of Israel,
and straightway he stood up by the side of the reapers who were still eating their meal.
And he never told any man what had happened to him. He thought that the people would
return speedily from the city of Babylon, but he died and was buried in the tomb of his
fathers many years before the return of the people. This prophet prophesied to the men of
the country of Judah, saying, “Ye will most certainly see the Gentiles despoiling the
sanctuary.” and it came to pass even as he said. And he also prophesied and said unto
them, “Ye shall afterwards see the glory of God.” And he also prophesied and said, “The
sanctuary shall be rooted up, and shall be given unto an alien people.” And he said, “The
covenant of the altar shall be rent and shall be split up into small fragments, and the top of
two pillars shall be carried away, and none shall know whither they have gone. And the
angel must take them into the place wherein is planted the wood of the Cross of their Lord,
so that God may be known in the desert, and He shall judge those who war against them,
the Serpent of olden time.” And everything has been fulfilled even as he prophesied. [See
Habakkuk 2, 3.]
And on this day also Saint Dionysius, Bishop of the city of Athens, became a martyr. This
holy man was a native of Athens, and he excelled all the men thereof in honor (or glory),
and in understanding, and in wisdom, and in learning; now he was one of the counselors in
the Council of learned judges in the city of Athens. Paul the apostle taught him, and
baptized him with Christian baptism, and made him Bishop of the city of Athens. And he
composed many discourses, and among these was one for the eve of the Sabbath (Friday),
which treated of the Crucifixion of our Lord Jesus Christ. One day this holy man was
sitting in the House of Wisdom of the city of Athens (now it was the day whereon the
learned were to hold a meeting therein), and he was sitting upon the throne of state, for he
was the chief of all the wise men, and the other wise men were assembling, and at the
moment of noon the sun became dark, and the earth quaked, and all the people were
terrified and feared greatly. And they asked Saint Dionysius and said unto him, “Master,
make us to know what hath happened in the world.” And he took up a book about the
world of nature, and he looked at the balance in his mind and understanding, and he
enquired concerning the rising of the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and he found that
they were all in a settled state, and that they had not moved from their courses. Similarly
he looked at the great sea and saw that it was surrounding all the ends of the world, and he
found that it too was in a state of peace and quietness. Then he took up an astrolabe and
looked into it, and behold God, ‘El-Maknun, that is to say, the “Hidden,” the Creator of the
heavens and the earth, came down from the heavens upon earth. And His own people rose
up against Him, and crucified Him. And straightway he rent his garments and sorrowed
with a great sorrow. And the councilors and the wise and learned noblemen asked him to
reveal unto them what had appeared unto him in respect of the darkness which had taken
place at noon, and concerning the earthquake; and he told them everything which had
taken place; and when they heard this they feared with a great fear. And he commanded
his disciple Josephus to write down everything that had happened during that hour, and the
name of that day, and the name of that month, and the name of that year; and Josephus
wrote down everything that happened according to the command of Dionysius. And he
also wrote upon all the gates of their idols which were in their houses, “God ‘El-Maknun,
69

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
that is to say, the ‘Hidden,’ hath come down from heaven.” After fourteen years the
Apostle Paul came to the city of Athens, and he preached therein, by the help of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God - blessed be His Name! [And he preached how He
came down] from heaven, and His Incarnation by our Lady Saint Mary the Virgin, and His
Passion, and His Crucifixion, and His Resurrection, and His Ascension into heaven, and
His second coming to judge the living and the dead. When the men of Athens heard the
preaching of Saint Paul the Apostle, they marveled exceedingly and they ran and told Saint
Dionysius about it. And they said unto him, “A certain man came into our city this day,
and preached unto us a new god whom we do not know, and whom our fathers before us
did not know.” And Dionysius sent a messenger who brought the Apostle Paul to him, and
he said unto him, “Who is this new god whom thou hast preached in our city?” And the
Apostle Paul answered and said unto him, “Whilst I was passing through the open spaces
of your city I found written upon the doors of the houses of your idols the words, ‘God ‘ElMaknun,’ that is to say, the ‘Hidden God,’ hath come down from heaven; this is He of
Whom I have preached unto you.” And straightway Saint Dionysius commanded his
disciple [Josephus] to bring unto him that document which he had written fourteen years
ago; and he brought it to him. And Dionysius asked the Apostle Paul, saying, “When was
the sign of Him Whom thou preachest [made known]?’ And Saint Paul the Apostle
answered and said unto him, “On Friday, in the month of Adar, which is the seventeenth
day of the month Megabit, at noon, our Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, and the sun
became dark, and the earth quaked at that moment.” When they heard this they all
believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and they bowed down at the feet of the Apostle Paul,
and he baptized them with Christian baptism, and he made Saint Dionysius bishop over
them. Now this Saint Dionysius is he who translated the Ordinances of the Church. After
this he went to the borders of the West in the days of the Apostles, and he performed many
signs and wonders. And the Emperor Domitian, the infidel, seized him and inflicted severe
tortures upon him, and then he cut off his holy head with the sword; and Dionysius
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven. After they had cut off his
head he walked to stadium holding his head in his hands. And the Emperor Domitian also
cut off the heads of Josephus and Urianus, the disciples of Saint Dionysius.
Salutation to Dionysius, the friend of ‘Entona (Antonius), Bishop of the city of Bana.
Salutation to Josephus and Urianus.
On this day also ‘Entona (Antonius), Bishop of the city of Bana, became a martyr.
And on this day also is commemorated Enos, the son of Seth, who was the first to call
upon God. He lived 190 years and begat Cainan; and all the days of his life were 620
years, and he died at the beginning of the Sabbath.
Salutation to Hermolaus the priest, and to his brother Heracletus, and to his brother, the
bishop, and to Pantaleon who, when he prayed whilst the king was cutting off their heads,
caused an earthquake.
Salutation to father Bestalota Mika’el, the blood of whose body was found to be liquid
when it was translated to a second tomb.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
70

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TEKEMT 07
(October 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT, ONE
GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Pawli of the city of Tamaw. This holy man became
a monk and a fighter in his early years, and he dwelt in Debra ‘Ensena [near Asna] in
Upper Egypt, and his disciple Ezekiel was with him, and this man became a witness to the
excellences of his master, and to his ascetic combats. This holy man Abba Pawli
contended strenuously because of his love for Christ, and he killed himself seven times.
The first time he hung himself upon a tree head downwards, and he remained hanging
there for forty days and forty nights until his blood flowed from his nose, and he yielded
up his soul. And God raised him up from death by His power. The second time he cast
himself into the waves of the sea, thinking that the large fish and the tiger-fish would
assuredly devour him. Now the tiger-fish would not touch him at all, and he remained
submerged in the water for many years and he died. And our Lord Jesus Christ raised him
up from the dead a second time. The third time he cast himself into the sand and died, and
our Lord raised him up. The fourth time he threw himself down from the top of a high hill
and rolled down it, and the side of the hill was covered with stones as sharp as knives, and
they pierced his temples and every part of his body, and he died straightway; and Ezekiel
his disciple wept over him, and our Lord Jesus Christ came and comforted him. The fifth
time he threw himself from the top of a high tree on to a large stone, which was as sharp as
a sword, and he was split up into two pieces and died; and the Lord raised him up. The
sixth time he tied his head to his feet and he remained in this position for forty days and
forty nights, and died; and the Lord sent unto him an angel who raised him up and
comforted him. In this manner this holy man tortured himself six times and died six times,
and each time he died our Lord raised him up. The seventh time he stretched out his legs
over a deep well, and stood there for forty days and forty nights and died there. And our
Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him, and raised him up from the dead, and strengthened
him, and said unto him, “O my beloved Pawli, hast thou not toiled enough and killed
thyself often enough?” And Pawli said unto Him, “Leave me, O my Lord, to toil for Thy
holy name’s sake, even as Thou Thyself hast toiled for the race of the children of men.
Thou art God, and the Son of God, and Thou didst die for our sins; as for us we are not
worthy that Thou shouldst toil for us”; and our Lord comforted him, and strengthened him,
and went up into heaven. When the holy father Abba Besoy went to Debra ‘Ensena, he
met Abba Pawli. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto Pawli and said unto him, “Thy
body shall be with the body of Abba Besoy”; and when Saint Abba Pawli died, they
placed his body with that of Abba Besoy, even as our Lord Jesus Christ had told him.
When they wanted to carry the body of Saint Abba Besoy to Debra Scete, that is to say
Debra Abba Mararius, they took the body and laid it in a ship, and left behind the body of
Abba Pawli. And the ship stood still and would not move, but when they took the body of
Abba Pawli and laid it with that of Abba Besoy in the ship. straightway the ship moved
and brought them to Debra Scete, where the body of Saint Pawli and the body of Abba
Besoy remain until this day in the Church of Abba Besoy.
And on this day also Minas, and Hasina [and Cyprian, and Justina] became martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
71

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM

TEKEMT 08
(October 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT, ONE
GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Metra the old man became a martyr, and many others were martyred
with him. This saint was a native of Alexandria, and he was a believing Christian. When
Decius the infidel reigned he established the worship of idols, and afflicted all Christian
people, and his Edict came to the city of Alexandria, and he afflicted all the people thereof
and poured out their blood. And Saint Metra was accused of being a Christian before the
governor, and the governor had Saint Metra brought before him, and he held the matter to
be serious. And Saint Metra confessed our Lord Jesus Christ, and proclaimed that He was
God. And the governor said unto him, “Worship the gods and the idols, and I will give
thee much money”; and Saint Metra did not trust his promise greatly, and he said unto him,
“May thy promise and thy money go with thee to Sheol!” And the governor was wroth
with him, and he said unto him, “I will punish thee with great severity”; but the saint was
not afraid of his tortures, and he did not turn from his good counsel. On the contrary he
said unto him, “I worship my Lord Jesus Christ, the Creator of the heavens and the earth,
and how could it be right for me to forsake Him and to worship idols which are made of
stones and woods? They see not, and smell not, and walk not.” And the governor was
wroth with him, and he commanded his soldiers to beat him very severely. Then he hung
him up by his arms, and the soldiers slit his face and his temples with dry reeds, but our
Lord Jesus Christ healed his wounds, and raised him up whole and unharmed. When the
governor was tired of torturing him he commanded his soldiers to cut off his head, and
they cut off his head with a sword outside the city, and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven; and many people suffered martyrdom at the same
time. Salutation to Metra.
And on this day Saint Bacchus and Saint Pelagia became martyrs.
And on this day also is commemorated Abba Hor the martyr.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Bula, and Susannah, and her children the
martyrs in the city of Semwah, and Saint Agathon the anchorite. Salutation to the brothers
of Susannah, and to Hor, and to Agathon.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 09
(October 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Liwaryos (Liberius), Archbishop of the city of
Rome. This holy man was righteous, and excellent, and pure, and a monk from his earliest
72

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
years, and he grew old in the Ordinances of the Church, in which he was learned; and he
fulfilled all the Law and Doctrines of the Church. And the people chose him and
appointed him Archbishop of the city of Rome, and he sat on the throne of Peter the
Apostle. And having sat on the throne of Peter the Apostle, the chief of the Apostles, he
followed a righteous course and was well pleasing unto God, the Most High. And he
taught the people at all times, and he admonished those who transgressed the
commandments of God, and turned them into the way of God. When Constantine the Less
was dead the wicked Julian reigned after him, and this wicked Julian denied Christ and
afflicted the Christian people. And he threatened Saint Basil, saying, “I am going to lay
waste the churches of the Christians and destroy them,” but God destroyed Julian the
infidel through the prayer of Saint Basil. It was then that God sent the honorable Saint
Mercurius, the martyr, and he destroyed that serpent. Now Saint Basil stood before a
picture of Saint Mercurius, and he said unto him, “This infidel told me that he would
destroy the churches, therefore I beseech thee to kill him in the war”; and Saint Mercurius
in the picture nodded his head as if to say, “Yea, I will.” This Julian the infidel was the
son of the sister of his father Constantine, and he opened the temples of the idols and
afflicted the Christian people, and tortured very many of them. And this Saint Liwaryos
(Liberius) came from the city of Rome to the city of Caesarea, and he visited Saint Basil,
and the two agreed together to go to the city of Antioch, and they visited Julian the infidel
and turned him from his apostasy and error. Now these two men had known him from
their youth, when they were fellow-learners in school with him; and they rose up and
journeyed and arrived in the city of Antioch where the Emperor Julian was. And having
stood up before him they wanted to speak to him and to turn him from his error. And he
said to them, in mockery of our Lord Jesus Christ, “Where did ye leave the son of the
carpenter?” And Saint Basil answered and said unto him, “We left Him making a coffin
for thee, and when thou art dead they will bury thee therein in hell.” And Julian was wroth
with them, and he commanded his soldiers to shut them up in prison; and they shut Saint
Basil and Saint Liwaryos (Liberius) up in prison. And Saint Liwaryos (Liberius) saw a
vision in his sleep, and in it he was in prison, and Saint Mercurius said unto him, “Verily I
will not permit this infidel to utter blasphemies against my God.” And Saint Liwaryos
(Liberius) woke from his sleep and told Saint Basil of the vision, which he had seen; and
Saint Basil had also seen the same vision. Afterwards came the news of the killing of
Julian the infidel, and after him Womanyos reigned, and he believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ. And he brought the saints out of prison, and they departed, each of them, to his see.
Now it was Saint Mercurius who killed Julian the infidel at the entreaty of Saint Basil.
And Saint Liwaryos (Liberius) departed to the city of Rome, and he debated fiercely with
the followers of Arius, and he excommunicated them and exiled them from his see. And
he followed a righteous course, and was well pleasing unto God, and he died in peace, after
ruling his see for six years. Salutation to Liwaryos (Liberius).
And on this day died Abba Athanasius, Archbishop of Antioch. This holy man was a
monk, and anchorite, and one who served the Lord his God strenuously, and he was
sincere and humble and perfect in all good works. And all the bishops came to him to
make him archbishop, and they sent to the Maphrian (i.e., the head of the Jacobite Church),
the Bishop of the city of Seleucia, saying, “Behold, our father the archbishop, Abba
Michael, is dead, come quickly and speedily so that we may appoint an archbishop. We
have chosen a righteous man who is suitable for this holy office, and we are all waiting for
thee, for there is none save thee who can appoint him, according to the Ordinances of our
Fathers.” And having waited for the arrival of the Maphrian, the bishop, now they had
73

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
waited for a period of fifty days, they appointed Abba Athanasius, and they departed each
to his seat. And the Maphrian came according as the bishops sent to him, and when he
arrived at the city of ‘Amid (Diarbakr) on the frontiers of Syria, he met the bishops of
Antioch, and they told him that having waited for his arrival fifty days they had appointed
an archbishop. When the Maphrian heard this he was exceedingly wroth and said, “Is it
thus that ye violate the law which is between us and you?” Having thus said he
anathematized everyone who should mention the name of Abba Athanasius, whether at the
service of the Offering or at the beginning of incense; having thus spoken he returned to
his city. When Athanasius heard this thing he was exceedingly sorry, and he said unto his
disciple, “O my son, be obedient unto me, and do what I say unto thee so that my soul may
be blessed, I am going afar off for one year, and if my people seek for me tell them, ‘He is
in his cell’; and do thou command them with my voice, bind and loose”; and his disciple
said unto him, “I will.” And Abba Athanasius arrayed himself in poor raiment, and he
traveled on foot until he came to the city of Seleucia, and he knocked at the gates of the
bishop, and the gatekeeper said unto him, “What dost thou want?” And Athanasius said
unto him, “I wish to receive the blessing of my father the bishop.” When the gatekeeper
had told the bishop he brought Abba Athanasius, and the bishop said unto him, “Whence
art thou?” And he said unto him, “I have come from the country of Syria, lacking daily
bread and raiment, so that I may die under the shadow of thy prayer.” And the bishop said
unto him, “Art thou a priest or a deacon?” And he said, “Neither.” Then the bishop called
the steward and commanded him to place him with the monks. And Abba Athanasius
performed every kind of household work, even to the drawing of water, and the carrying
away of the dung of the horses and the mules, and the lighting of the fire, and there was no
kind of work for the brethren which he did not perform. When he had finished the work in
the bishop’s house he used to go to the houses of the monks, and draw water for them, and
light fires, and clean the houses, and at length the brethren loved him dearly and regarded
him as a heavenly angel, and then they entreated the bishop to make him a deacon. And on
the first day of the week the bishop went into the church and called Abba Athanasius in
order that he might appoint him a deacon, but Athanasius wept bitterly and said unto him,
“Leave me, Father, I am a poor man, and I am not fit for this grade.” When the bishop
seized him with vigor, Athanasius said unto him, “Forgive me, Father, for I am a deacon,
but on account of my many sins I have abandoned ministration.” When the bishop heard
this he marveled at his patient endurance; and for six months Athanasius continued to
perform the duties of a deacon. When the bishop saw his great intelligence (or knowledge)
he wished to appoint him to the work of a priest. And the first day of the week the bishop
came into the church, and he called Athanasius and said unto him, “The Holy Ghost hath
called thee this day; I am going to appoint thee a priest.” When Abba Athanasius heard
him, he fell down at the feet of the Father in tears, and he entreated him to let him alone.
When he knew that the bishop would not excuse him, he said unto him, “Have mercy upon
me; I am a priest.” When the father and the monks heard this they rejoiced in him and
honored him exceedingly. When the bishop saw the wisdom of his words and the
zealousness of his ministration, he wished to make him a bishop of a city the bishop
whereof was dead. And he summoned the archbishops, and the bishops, and the priests,
and the deacons, and the monks, in order that they might appoint him on the first day of the
week. And he called Abba Athanasius and said unto him, “ This day God hath called thee
to the grade of the episcopate of such and such a see.” And when Athanasius knew that he
would not excuse him, he wept bitterly and told them that he was Athanasius Archbishop
of Antioch, and he related to them the history of his coming in secret. When the father
74

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
heard these words from him he put off his crown and fell down upon the earth and became
as one dead for a long time. Having raised himself up, he cried out to the bishops and the
people, and said unto them, “O my brethren, tell me what I shall do, for at this moment I
am afraid that fire will come down from heaven and consume me, and that the earth will
open her mouth and swallow me up. Is it a desirable thing that Athanasius Archbishop of
Antioch should serve the dung of horses like a slave?” When the bishops and the people
heard these words they bowed low before him and kissed his hands and his feet. Then the
bishop commanded the bishops to bring fine apparel of the priesthood, and the cross and
the staff of the priesthood, and they seated him upon the throne, and the bishops carried
him and his throne upon their shoulders, and they brought him into the church, and they
carried him round about it thrice, saying, “Akseyos, Akseyos, Akseyos,” that is to say, “He
is worthy, He is worthy, He is worthy.” Then he put on the vestments for the consecration
of the Offering, and he consecrated the Offering, and administered it to them and he
blessed their city. How great was the joy of the Persians! And on the following day the
father brought a mule, and everything which was necessary for the journey, and he
mounted Abba Athanasius upon it, and he departed to the city of Antioch with archbishop
and bishops who traveled on foot. And Abba Athanasius said unto the Maphrian, “Do thou
mount and let us travel together.” And the Maphrian said unto him, “Far be it from me, O
Lord! Inasmuch as thou didst come on thy feet to my city I will go on my feet to thy city.”
When the Bishops of Antioch heard that the Archbishop Abba Athanasius had arrived,
they welcomed him and the Maphrian, the Bishop of Seleucia, and they restored
Athanasius to his throne and they rejoiced with great joy. Then they set on their way the
metropolitans and bishops, and they returned to their city in peace. And this father lived a
beautiful life, and he tended his flock with righteousness and integrity, and he died in
peace. Amen. Salutation to Athanasius, Archbishop of Antioch.
And on this day also died Stephen, the son of Nikomion and brother of Basilides. This
blessed man Stephen belonged to an honorable family, and his parents were among the
nobles of Antioch; they were exceedingly rich in gold, and silver, and glorious apparel, and
their slaves and handmaidens were innumerable. And Nikomion loved Christ exceedingly,
and he gave alms to the poor and needy, and he was beloved by all men. And having
begotten this holy man, he had him brought up carefully, and he taught him the Psalms of
David, and the Books of the Old and New Testaments, and finally he was filled with the
knowledge of the Holy Ghost. He learned to ride the horse, to hurl the spear, and to draw
the bow with Victor and Claudius in the house of Saint Basilides, whose brother’s son he
was, and because of this he was called the son of Basilides. All his kinsfolk were fearers
of God, and they walked in all His commandments and judgments, and among them was
none whose heart was not warmed by the flame of the love of Christ, and there was none
who turned from His way either to the right hand or to the left. When God saw the
strength of their love for Him, He wished to make them to inherit His kingdom and His
righteousness, which He hath prepared for them before the world was created. Then Satan
brought a man, a certain swineherd from the land of Egypt, and he belonged to men who
occupy themselves with devices for war, and his name was ‘Agripada, and from his earliest
youth the spirit of Satan dwelt in him. When he came to Antioch they made him master of
the horse, and when the King of Antioch died the throne was empty. One day when the
daughter of the king was walking about on the roof of her house, she saw him leaping
about with his horse whilst the musicians played music on their instruments. Thereupon
she lusted for him, and she married him, and finally she caused him to be made king, and
she called him Diocletian. And O what violence, and O what wickedness were committed
75

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
in his days after he had denied Christ! He worshipped idols and killed everyone who
believed on Christ. He was an eater of the flesh of men, and a drinker of human blood,
like the wild animals. He seized and scattered all the chosen people of the kingdom like
rams who have no shepherd. Some of them were killed by means of stakes driven through
them, and some of them he drove into exile, even to districts in Egypt, and they were
fettered with iron chains, and gags were in their mouths. At length the whole country of
Antioch was filled with weeping and lamentation, a man mourning for his wife, and a wife
for her husband, a father mourning for his son or a son for his father, or brother for brother
and friend for friend. At length the whole earth was filled with the blood of the saints, and
their bodies were cast out into the streets of the city, and there was none to bury them
except the watchmen of the city, to whom bribes had to be given secretly to bury them.
And this Saint Stephen continued in prayer to God by day and by night that He would give
him a crown of martyrdom. Now as a beginning to his iniquity Diocletian wrote an Edict
which he sent into every part of his dominions, saying, “I Diocletian the Emperor, Lord of
the World, hereby command that in every country of my dominions they close the
churches, and open the houses of idols (i.e., temples), and worship my gods, for it is they
who have given me victory in battle. Whosoever shall not worship them and bow down
before them, his house shall be plundered and laid waste, and he shall be punished with
every kind of punishment; none shall be spared, neither rich nor poor, nor great nor small.”
Then the emperor assembled all his soldiers and all the nobles of his kingdom, and he
commanded that this Edict should be proclaimed before the multitude. When Saint
Stephen had heard the foul Edict his whole body burned with the fire of zeal, and he
accounted Diocletian as nothing, and poured out blasphemies upon him, and he was greatly
moved in his spirit and said, “What is this new act of violence which thou hast made
manifest, O king, in this city, by writing this unclean and accursed Edict of Apollo (?)? For
our Lord Jesus Christ shall defend everyone who believeth on Him.” Then Saint Stephen
waxed strong and bold and he leaped upon the soldier who had the filthy Edict in his hand,
and tore it out of it, now the emperor and all his nobles were looking on at him, and
Stephen tore the Edict in pieces. And the emperor said unto him, “O Stephen, what hast
thou done? Dost thou wish to bring destruction upon thyself?” Then the emperor drew the
sword, which he had in his hand, and he hacked him down the middle, and he became two
parts. And the head of Saint Stephen remained for a long time before the emperor, and it
reviled him and told him what would come upon him in the later time, and how he would
received alms in the gates of Antioch, and how his eyes would be made wholly blind, and
how after this he would be destroyed. And the head cried out with a loud voice and
repeated the names of all the saints of the city of Antioch who became martyrs. And the
story of the head of Saint Stephen was heard in all the cities of Antioch, and many
multitudes of people gathered together to see the head, which reviled the emperor and told
him of his ruin. When the emperor saw that the head of the saint spoke of his destruction
before the assembled multitude he was greatly ashamed, and he commanded his soldiers to
take it away, and whilst they were doing so it continued to talk and would not be silent;
and when they buried it in the earth it still uttered many words. And this head remained
buried in the earth for three days, and all the people heard it talking to the emperor and
reviling him, even as the head of John the Baptist reviled Herod in days of old; for Herod
and Diocletian were alike in nature and disposition. Herod was led astray through
fornication, and the drinking of wine, and at length he killed the Prophet John greater than
whom there was none born of woman. Through the murder of the righteous man he
acquired disgrace, and as for his wife, the earth swallowed her up; her daughter perished
76

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and he himself bred worms in his body, and he putrefied and he died in shame, wishing to
hide his fornication. The head of Saint John reviled Herod boldly, and the head of Saint
Stephen reviled Diocletian, who was wishing to prove boldly the greatness of his idols and
their gods, and proclaimed boldly that there were devils in his gods. And the head
prophesied to him that his kingdom should be broken and his eyes blinded, and that he
should receive alms in the gates of the city, and that he should die in disgrace. When
Diocletian saw that the head of Saint Stephen would not keep silent, he ordered them to
cast it into a lead box and to seal the mouth thereof, and to throw it into the sea by night;
and by this act the martyrdom of Saint Stephen was finished. Then the angel of God came
down from heaven, and brought out the box of lead and laid it on the seashore. Whilst his
mother was searching for his body by the will go God she came to the place where the box
of lead was, and she took it from there and laid it up in her house until the days of
persecution were passed; and she lighted a lamp at his grave which burned by day and by
night. After the days of persecution were passed she built a fine church for him, and
innumerable signs and miracles were wrought therein. Salutation to Stephen, the son of
Basilides.
And on this day also, in the nine hundred and eighty-fifth year of the holy martyrs [(A.D.
1269) the Bodleian ms. has A.M. 388], in the reign of Iyob Kher, and in the days when
Abba Cyril held office, a stupendous and marvelous thing happened in the world, which
terrified those who beheld it, and those who heard thereof on that day. The sun became
dark, and it became darker and darker until the day was like night, and the stars appeared,
and men lighted lamps. And they feared with a great fear, and they begged for His
compassion and mercy, which He promised them, and He multiplied His mercy on them.
And He removed fear from them, and the light re-appeared, and the sun came forth
according to its custom, and it lighted up the whole world, and men extinguished their
lamps. And the period of the darkness of the sun was one hour, that is to say, from the half
of the eighth hour to the half of the ninth. And additional praise must be given to God
because He did not hasten to harm men for their sins, but He made haste to show His
compassion and long-suffering towards them; and praise be also to our Lord Jesus Christ
forever and ever. Amen.
And on this day also is commemorated Abba Simeon the Archbishop [or Bishop].
And on this day also Thomas the Apostle began to work like an artisan, and to preach in
the country of India where-unto he went with ‘Abnes the merchant. And ‘Abnes went to
salute Guendefor the king, and he told him concerning Thomas the carpenter whom he had
brought with him. And the king rejoiced and said unto him, “What is thy trade?” And the
apostle said, “I am a carpenter and an architect. And I can make walls of houses, and beds,
and scales, and wheels (carts?), and ships, and oars, and royal palaces.” And the king
rejoiced, and he took Thomas to a place where he was going to build a palace, and he said
unto him, “When wilt thou have built [the house]” And the apostle said, “After two
months, [I will begin on] the new moon of the month Khedar, and I will finish in the
month of Miyazya”. And the king marveled and said unto him, “Every house is built in the
summer, then how can this house be built in the winter?” Then the king gave him much
money both for himself and for those who were to work with him, and having taken it, he
gave it to the poor and needy, saying, “I give what belongs to the king to another king.”
Then the king sent his minister to the apostle to learn if the palace was finished, and the
apostle said unto him, “Thy palace is finished, but there remaineth the roof to put on.”
77

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And the king sent him money a second time, and he said unto him, “Finish quickly.” then
when the king came and asked for the palace which Thomas had built, the apostle said unto
him, “No palace hath been built; there are only the alms given to the poor of thy goods.”
And the king was wroth, and he shut the apostle and the merchant up in prison until he
could think out in what way he should kill them. That night Gadon the king’s brother fell
sick and died, and the angels showed him the palace, which Thomas had built for
Guendefor his brother. He said unto them, “Who is this palace for?” And the angels said
unto him, “This is for the king, and the Apostle Thomas who is in the prison house hath
built it for him.” When his soul returned to him Gadon told his brother this, and then they
all vied with each other, and they went to the prison house and brought out the apostle and
the merchant. And they believed on our Lord Christ, and were all baptized, both men and
women, in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and they received His
Holy Body and His Honorable Blood. Then Thomas laid his hands upon them, and gave
them the benediction, and departed from them.
Salutation to India and salutation to the Merciful One.
On this day is commemorated David King of Ethiopia, who was called the “fan of the
wicked and the wall of adamant.”
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 10
(October 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.!
On this day fifty nuns, who were pure and holy virgins, together with their mother Sofia,
became martyrs. These pure and holy women came from widely separated cities and
districts, and they were gathered together by divine and spiritual love, and the desire to
assume the garb of the ascetic life, which is the garb of the angels. They dwelt in one of
the houses for virgins, which were in the city of Roha (Edessa), and they had as superior
the holy Abbess Sofia who was filled with every kind of grace and with wisdom. And she
trained them so perfectly in the duties and exercises of the spiritual life that they became
like angels upon earth, and they fasted and prayed continually, and read the histories of the
spiritual fighting of the monks. Among them were some who had dwelt in the nunnery for
seven years. And some of them were novices. The infidel Emperor Julian passed by their
house in the city of Roha (Edessa) on his way to make war on Sapor, the son of Sapor, the
King of Persia, for he had heard that Sapor was coming to make war upon him. And Julian
having gone against him and come back, he went to that nunnery wherein the virgins lived,
and he asked [an officer] what the building was. And [the officer] said unto him, “This is a
nunnery.” and Julian commanded his soldiers to go into that nunnery, and to kill everyone
in it, and to carry off all the goods which were therein. And the soldiers of the infidel
emperor went into the nunnery, and they beat the virgins with whips and cut off their heads
with swords, and they plundered everything which was there. And because of this thing
the Lord took vengeance upon him with the vengeance of His wrath, that is to say, Saint
Mercurius the martyr speared him with his spear whilst he was engaged in fighting, and he
78

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
cast him from his horse, and killed him. And Julian died an evil death, and he departed to
the Sheol which is forever. And these holy virgins went into everlasting joy, and inherited
the kingdom of heaven. Salutation to the virgins whose blood Mercurius avenged.
And on this day also a General Council of the Saints took place in the days of Victor,
Archbishop of the city of Rome, and in the days of Demetrius, Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. Now the cause for the assembling of this Council was this: Christian people
were baptized on the festival of baptism, on the twenty-first day of the month Ter (Jan. Feb.), and from the following day they fasted until the twenty-second day of the month
Yakatit (Feb. - March), that is to say, for forty days, and then they ate. And after thirty
days they began, on the twenty-third day of Magabit (March - April), and kept the Octave
of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the festival of His Resurrection, for the
Crucifixion of our Lord took place on the twenty-ninth day of Magabit. After Demetrius,
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, had been enthroned, God illumined the heart of a
certain artisan, who knew not how to read or to write, with Divine grace, and he learned all
the Laws of the Church, and he knew them by heart, and he interpreted them. Then by the
Holy Spirit he compiled a table for reckoning the Epact, wherefrom men might know [the
days of] the Fast, and the Resurrection; and he wrote in the Coptic and Greek (Rom)
tongues. Then he made a copy of this table of Epact and sent it to Victor, Archbishop of
the city of Rome, he read it and found it good and rejoiced therein exceedingly. And he
sent and gathered together a large assembly containing fourteen bishops of his diocese, and
many learned priests, and he read to them the calculation of the Epact, and they found it
very good, and they rejoiced in it, and accepted it, and they wrote many copies of it and
sent them into all countries. And the Holy Fast and the Festival of Easter have been
regulated by that circulation from that day to this. And they departed to their countries
praising the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, to Whom be glory and honor.
Salutation to Demetrius and to the priests who made haste to assemble in order to make
rules for times for keeping Lent and Easter.
On this day Paul and his three companions became martyrs.
Salutation to Gabra Maryam.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 11
(October 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the pure and righteous woman Hannah, the mother of our Lady, the holy
Virgin Mary, the God-bearer. This holy woman was a native of the city of Jerusalem, and
she was the daughter of Matat, the son of Levi, the son of Melki, of the sons of Aaron the
priest, and of the tribe of Levi. Matat had three children, and the name of the eldest was
Mary; the name of the second was Sofia, and the name of the third was Hannah. And
Mary married and brought forth Salome, the midwife who received our Lady Mary when
she brought forth Christ our God. And Sofia married and brought forth Elisabeth, the
mother of John the Baptist, and this holy woman Hannah married the righteous man
79

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Joachim, who was of the tribe of Judah, and she brought forth our Lady Mary. Our Lady
Mary and Salome and Elisabeth were sisters. Now the history of the strife of this holy
woman Hannah we know of nothing whatsoever which we can record, but we know and
we are convinced that she was the most honored of women because she was held to be
worthy to become the mother of the mother of God in the flesh. And had she not
possessed many virtues, and great righteousness, which was superior to the righteousness
of every other woman, she would never have been worthy of this act of grace. Now this
righteous woman was barren, and she used to pray and to entreat God continually to give
her children, and God gave her a beautiful daughter, one to be revered, and she and all her
people rejoiced, that is to say our Lady Mary. Therefore it is meet for us to honor her, and
to celebrate a festival to her, because of the exalted gift, which God gave her. Salutation to
thee O Hannah, thou ladder of the prayers of the righteous.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Archelaus the martyr, and Elisa the abbot,
and Saint Pachomius, and Minas the martyr, and his mother Urania, Salutation to
Archelaus, Elisa, and Pachomius. Salutation to Minas a saint of the Church. Salutation to
Urania whose apparel they stripped off and then they beat her on her back and belly.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 12
(October 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the commemorative feast of the glorious angel, Michael the
archangel. On this day God sent Michael to Samuel the prophet whilst he was in the
sanctuary, and commanded him to go to the house of Jesse, the father of David, in
Bethlehem to anoint his son David king over the children of Israel. And Samuel went to
Jesse, and he said unto him, “Bring hither all thy sons”: and Jesse brought them [all] with
the exception of David, who was tending the sheep in the fields. When Samuel raised the
horn of oil of kings over the heads of the sons of Jesse, [he saw that] God was not pleased
with them. And Samuel said unto Jesse, “Doth there not remain unto thee some other
son?” And Jesse said unto him, “There remaineth the youth, the youngest of them, who is
herding the sheep in the fields.” And Samuel said unto him, “Bring him hither”; and Jesse
brought him. And straightway Samuel took up the horn of oil of kings, and anointed him,
and God was pleased with him, and he reigned over the children of Israel. And on this day
also God sent Saint Michael the archangel to David the prophet, and he helped him and
gave him strength to slay Goliath, the giant of the Philistines, and deliver the children of
Israel. For this reason the doctors of the Church have commanded and ordained that the
people shall keep a festival in honor of Saint Michael on the (twenty-second?) day of this
month. Salutation to Saint Michael.
And on this day Saint Matthew the apostle and evangelist, one of the Twelve Apostles,
became a martyr, after he had preached in the cities of the priests, and converted them to
the knowledge of God. Now it happened that when he wished to go into the city of priests,
he found a certain young man who said unto him, “Thou wilt not be able to go into this
80

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
city unless thou shavest off the hair of thy head and thy beard, and carriest palm branches
in thy hand.” And he did even as the young man commanded him, and as he was
sorrowing because of this, straightway our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him under a
form, which he knew, that is to say, the form of the young man who had spoken unto him;
and He encouraged and consoled him and then disappeared from him. When Saint
Matthew had entered into the city, he made himself unseen by the people, like one of the
priests. And he went to the temple of Apollo, and found the high priest, and talked with
him concerning the gods, and Saint Matthew made him to know that they were not gods;
and he wrought miracles and wonders before him, and light rose upon them, and a table
came down to them from heaven. When Hermes the priest saw this wonderful thing he
said unto Saint Matthew, “What is the name of your god?” And he said, “The Name of my
God is Christ,” and straightway Hermes the priest believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and
many people believed with him. When the king of this city heard this thing he commanded
his soldiers to burn them in the fire. And at the moment the son of the king died, and Saint
Matthew made supplication to our Lord Christ, and he raised the king’s son from the dead;
and straightway the king and all the men of the city believed. Then Saint Matthew
appointed a bishop and priests over them, and he built a church for them, and he went forth
from the city to the cities, which were outside, and he converted them and brought them to
the knowledge of God. Before this Saint Thomas had been to the City of the Blessed, and
he saw our Lord coming to them at all times, having with Him the souls of babes, which
were in number eighteen thousand. And on the first day of every feast our Lord Christ
cometh to them, and with Him are His angels. And these blessed ones are they to whom
Simas the desert priest went, and he was witness of their strives, and of their marvelous
works. After this Saint Matthew the apostle and evangelist went to the city of Jerusalem,
and the land of Judah, and he wrote his Gospel in the Hebrew language. Then he went to
the city, which is outside, and he found therein a certain man who was in prison; now Saint
Matthew used to visit those who were shut up in prison. And the man had to pay back to
his lord the money, which he had given him to trade therewith, together with a profit
thereon, but he dropped it into the sea and lost it. And Saint Matthew the apostle said unto
that man, “Go thou to such and such a place, and what thou findest therein take, and give
to thy lord.” And the man went and he found a bag full of gold, and he took it and gave it
to his master and was saved. And the story of Saint Matthew’s [act] was heard throughout
the city, and many men believed on our Lord Jesus Christ. When Justus the governor of
that city heard that many men believed on our Lord Christ, he was exceedingly wroth, and
he ordered his soldiers to cut off the head of Saint Matthew, and to cast his body to the
fowls of the air. And they cut off his head with a sword, and certain believing men came
and took his holy body and laid it in a holy place. Salutation to Matthew whose voice
compelled the deep to restore from its depths a certain man, the gold, which had sunk in it.
And on this day also died the holy father, the pure virgin, the fighter of lusts, the
vanquisher of natural appetites, Abba Demetrius the twelfth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This holy man was a man of the people (i.e., of lowly origin) and he knew not
letters, and he used to work in a vineyard. His parents gave him a wife in his youth, and he
lived with her until he was appointed archbishop--forty-eight years. Both husband and
wife remained virgins, and no one knew about them except God, Who knoweth souls and
hearts. When the time drew nigh for the death of Saint Julian the archbishop, the
predecessor of Demetrius, the angel of the Lord appeared unto this holy man and told him
that Demetrius was to be archbishop after him. And he gave him a sign concerning him,
and said unto him, “Tomorrow a man shall come unto thee having a cluster of grapes with
81

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him; seize and pray over him, and appoint him archbishop.” When Saint Julian woke up
from his sleep, he told the bishops and the priests who lived with him what he had seen,
and what the angel of the Lord had said unto him concerning Demetrius the archbishop.
When the morning had come this Saint Demetrius, the archbishop, found in the vineyard a
cluster of grapes, which had ripened before their time, and he took it to Abba Julian the
archbishop, so that he might be blessed by him. And Saint Julian took him by the hand,
and said unto the bishops and priests, “This is he who shall be archbishop after me.” And
they prayed over him, and they took him and bound him until Abba Julian died, whereupon
they finished the prayers over him and made him archbishop. And he was full of heavenly
grace, and he was versed in many kinds of learning, and he knew by heart all the Books of
the Church and the interpretations thereof, and he read many abstruse works. It was he
who regulated the reckoning of the Epact, for the Christians used to keep the festival of the
Baptism, and on the following day [began] the fast of Forty Days. And at the octave of
His Passion they celebrated the festival of the Passion of our Lord by itself, and this they
did from the days of the Apostles until the days of this father. And this father proclaimed
the reckoning of the Epact by the Holy Spirit, and he regulated the reckoning of the Holy
Fast. And he sent out letters [concerning it] to the Archbishops of the city of Rome, and of
the city of Ephesus, and of the city of Antioch, and of the city of Jerusalem, and they
rejoiced thereat, and they ordered [the Holy Fast] even as it is at this day. And God was
with this Father Demetrius because of his sincerity (or purity). He used always to look for
our Lord Jesus Christ at the time of the consecration of the Offering as he was
administering the Holy Mysteries to those who were meet for them; and he drove away
sinners, and said unto them, “Go ye and repent, and afterwards come and ye shall receive
the Holy Mysteries; ye shall not receive them whilst ye are in sin so that ye may not go
into Gahanna.” And Saint Demetrius used to reveal their sins to the people, those that they
committed in secret, and he would rebuke each one of them for the sins, which they
committed. Because of this believers were afraid of him, and the members of his
congregation did not commit sin because of their exceedingly great fear of him, and
because they did not wish him to put them to shame before the congregation. And some of
the people whom he used to rebuke for their sins would say among themselves, “This man
is married, and his wife is with him at this present, why should he rebuke us especially?
None but a virgin should be appointed to the throne of Mark the evangelist.” One night an
angel of the Lord came to him and said unto him, “Demetrius, permit not thyself only to do
as thou pleases, and permit not thy neighbor to be destroyed. Remember that our Lord
Christ saith in the Holy Gospel, ‘The good shepherd giveth his life for his flock.’” And
Demetrius said unto him, “What is it that thou wouldst say unto me, my lord?” And the
angel said unto him, “Reveal the mystery which is between thyself and thy wife to the
people.” On the following day the festival of Pentecost was celebrated, and this holy
Father Demetrius consecrated the Offering, and he commanded the archdeacons to tell the
priests and all the people who were there that they were not to leave the church, but to stay
together therein; and the archdeacons did as the archbishop had commanded. When the
priests and the people were assembled he commanded that much wood should be brought
and that a fire should be made of it, and [when] they had done so, this Abba archbishop
rose and stood up in the midst of the fire whilst all the people were looking on. And he
prayed for a long time, and then he spread out his garment and took some of the fire with
his hand and placed it in it. Then he called his wife, and she came unto him, and he said
unto her, “Spread out thy woolen head-cloth,” and he cast some red-hot charcoal into it,
and then he said unto her, “Stand up that we may pray.” And the red-hot charcoal
82

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
continued to burn in the woolen head-cloth, and the cloth was not burned; and they
remained in this position and prayed for a long time. After this the priests and the people
asked him, saying, “We require thy holiness, O our father, to make us know what this
mystery is.” And he said unto them, “I have not done this seeking for the vain praise of
this world, but behold, I have lived with this woman for eight and forty years, until this
day. Now this woman whom thou seest was the daughter of my father’s brother. Her
relatives died and they left her, then a little girl in my father’s house, and I was brought up
with her. When I was fifteen years of age my father gave her unto me in marriage. When
we entered the marriage-chamber in our house, she said unto me, ‘Why have they given
me in marriage to thee, seeing that I am thy sister?’ And I said unto her, ‘Dost thou wish
us to live together in one house, and never to separate from each other, and to preserve our
virginity undefiled, and that there shall be nothing between us?’ And she said, ‘Yea.’ And
I have lived with her in one place for eight and forty years, and we have lain in the same
bed on one bedstead. And the Lord God Who is judge between us, and Who knoweth what
is hidden and the thoughts of hearts, He knoweth that I have never known her as a woman,
and on her part she doth not know me as a man, but we have passed all these days just
lying side by side. When we lift ourselves up we see as it were a face, which resembleth
that of an eagle in our bed, between me and between her. And he layeth his left wing over
her and his right wing over me, and this he doeth from the time we lie down until the
morning, and then he disappeareth. Now do not think, O Christian people, that I have
revealed this matter unto you because I am seeking the praise which men desire in this
world, but God hath commanded me to reveal unto you this mystery, for He wisheth what
is good for all men--the Christ, the Redeemer of all the world.” And in the days of this
father certain evil men appeared whose names were Kalemos and ‘Aganos, and others with
them, and they wrote a lying book; and Demetrius anathematized them and
excommunicated them. And during the days of his office he taught and encouraged the
Christian people, and all believers, every day regularly. When he was grown old and
feeble they used to carry him on a litter, and set him down in the church, and he taught the
people all day long from sunrise to sunset, and all the people pressed eagerly to hear his
doctrine. And all the days of his life were one hundred and five (six?) years. Of these
were fifteen during which he was unmarried, and eight and forty years passed before he
was appointed archbishop, and he held office of archbishop for three and forty years; and
he died in peace. Salutation to Demetrius.
And on this day also are commemorated the righteous men Peter, and Dionymus (or
Diyonas), and the strife of Ya’ekob, and Abu Tefa, and Theodore.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

83

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TEKEMT 13
(October 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Ptolemachus and his brethren became martyrs.
Salutation to Ptolemachus and his brethren.
Salutation to Paul, the new Tawrasi.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Zachariah the monk. The name of the
father of this holy man was ‘Akaryos. And ‘Akaryos wished for the garb of the monk, and
when he told his wife this thought, she agreed with what he said unto her. And he had two
children, one boy and one little girl. And ‘Akaryos left the children with their mother, and
he went to the desert of Scete, and he became a monk there under the direction of a certain
holy old man who was a monk. After a few days there was a great famine in the city, and
his wife took the two children and came to the desert of Scete to their father ‘Akaryos, and
she told him of the tribulation which had come upon her through the famine. And she said
unto her two children, “Go to your father,” and the two children wandered about for a
little, and the girl returned to her mother. And ‘Akaryos said unto her, “Behold, God hath
done what is right, and hath divided the two children between us; take thou the girl and I
will take the boy.” And the woman took her daughter and departed, and ‘Akaryos took his
son, who was this father Zachariah, and brought him to the holy old men, and they prayed
over him, and they prophesied that he would become a perfect monk. And Zachariah was
brought up with every kind of good work in the desert of Scete, and with every kind of
virtue and righteous work. And his form was exceedingly handsome, and there were many
murmurings in the desert because of him, and the monks said among themselves, “How is
it possible for such an exceedingly handsome young man to dwell in the desert of Scete
among monks?” And when Zachariah heard that the monks were murmuring because of
him, he departed to the lake of Dabra Natrun, which is like unto salt. And none of the
people knew him, and he stripped off his apparel, and plunged his body into the lake, and
he remained under the salt water for many hours. And his body swelled and became
discolored, and his flesh became full of sores like unto that of a man who is sick. Then he
went forth from the lake and put on his apparel and came to his father ‘Akaryos; and when
his father saw him he did not know him, but after a few days he recognized him and knew
that he was his son. And he asked him and said unto him, “What is it that hath changed
thine appearance?” And he told him everything that had happened and how he had
submerged himself in the lake of Natrun, which is hambo (salt). And when the First Day
of the week came, he went to the church to receive the Holy Mysteries with the brethren.
And God shewed to Abba Isidore, priest of Scete, what Abba Zachariah had done, and
when Abba Zachariah came to Abba Isidore to receive the Offering he looked at him and
marveled at him, and he said unto the monks, “Zachariah received the Offering on the last
First Day of the week like every other man, and now he hath become an angel of God.”
And when the other monks knew what Zachariah had done they marveled exceedingly, and
they ascribed blessing and praise to him. And this Father Zachariah possessed together
with other excellences the virtue of humility, and his humility was so perfect that his father
spake of it to the monks, and said unto them, “I have labored greatly, but I have never
attained to the rule of this my son Zachariah.” This Zachariah lived a strenuous life and
84

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
strove exceedingly for five and forty years; now when he came to the desert of Scete he
was seven years of age. And all the days of his life were two and fifty years, and he was
well pleasing unto God and he died in peace. Salutation to Zachariah.
And on this day also are commemorated ‘Eulana, and Eulacius (Eulochius?), and
Theodore, and ‘Ablas and his brethren, and Nitolaus, and ‘Abela.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 14
(October 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy Apostle Philip who was one of the seventy-two disciples. This
holy man was a native of the city of Caesarea of the Philistines, and when our Lord Jesus
Christ passed through the city of Caesarea He taught therein. And when the holy man
heard His doctrine, he believed in Him, and submitted to His commands, and followed
Him straightway. And of those who followed Him our Lord chose seventy-two disciples,
and sent them out to preach, and to heal the sick, and this man was among their number;
and He chose [also] Twelve Apostles, [and] of their number were the seven deacons whom
He appointed for them. And this holy man preached in the cities of Samaria and baptized
[men therein] with Christian baptism. And he baptized Simon the magician, who perished
when he wished to buy with money the gift of the Holy Spirit. And the angel of the Lord
appeared unto this disciple Philip, and he commanded him to go by the way of the country
of Gazu. And he rose up and went there, and he found the eunuch, the steward of Hendake
(Candace), the Queen of Ethiopia, and he was reading in the Book of Isaiah the Prophet.
And the words which he was reading said, “Like a sheep he came to his slaughter, and like
a sheep that bleats not before him that will shear him” (Isaiah, 7 (53:7)); and this disciple
Philip explained to him the meaning of the words which he was reading. And he said unto
him, “This is a prophecy concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, Who suffered of His own free
will for the salvation of man.” And the eunuch believed through Philip the disciple, and he
asked him to baptize him, and Philip did so. After he had baptized him the angel of the
Lord carried Philip the disciple to the city of ‘Azdad and he preached therein. And he
departed to Asia, and there he preached the Gospel, and there were four sons who preached
with him. And having converted many of the Jews and Samaritans, and other peoples, and
brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, he died in peace. Salutation to Philip
and to his four sons who prophesied.
And on this day also died the holy Father Moses, the man of God. This holy man was a
native of the city of Byzantium; his father’s name was Euphemianus, and his mother’s
name was Aglaias. And they were exceedingly rich, and their possessions were very
many, and their slaves were more numerous than those of any others of their family, and
they were arrayed in rich apparel, which was embroidered in gold, and they wore girdles of
gold. And they feared God and performed His commandments, and they fasted every day
until the ninth hour, and they only ate once in the day, and then it was with the poor and
the needy. And they had no children, and they used to entreat God the Most High to give
85

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them a son, blessed and good, who should do God’s good pleasure. And God heard their
petition and gave them a son who was very handsome in person, and the grace of God was
upon him. And they rejoiced in him with a great joy, and they made great festival for the
poor and needy, and they multiplied their well doing. And they called that son Moses,
which being interpreted is “man of God”; for God heard their petition for him. And they
brought him up very piously, and they taught him all kinds of learning and spiritual
wisdom. When the child had grown up, his father Euphemianus said unto his wife
Aglaias, “Behold our son Moses hath arrived at man’s estate, and it is meet that we should
give him in marriage to a wife.” And his mother rejoiced at these words, and they
betrothed him to a daughter of one of the nobles of the city of Byzantium, whose person
was exceedingly beautiful. And they made a great feast to celebrate his marriage, and they
decorated the church of God, that is to say Hagia Sofia in the city of Byzantium. And they
made Moses to stand with his wife before the Tabernacle, and they crowned him with the
holy crown of matrimony, and they received the Holy Mysteries and they came to their
house in peace. And Euphemianus said unto his friend, “Tell the bridegroom to come into
the marriage-chamber to his bride, and let him rejoice in her after the manner of men.”
When Moses the man of God heard this word, he came into the marriage-chamber, and he
saw the maiden, and he marveled at her person exceedingly, and he praised God, and
blessed Him, and he thought within himself, saying, “Will not all this beauty of person
pass away and decay and become dust?” And he entreated God to guide him into the path
of the kingdom of the heavens. And he said unto the maiden, “Peace be unto thee, O my
sister, thou noble maiden!” And he stripped himself of his glorious apparel and gave it
unto her, and said unto her, “Have me in remembrance, O my noble sister, until we meet
again before our Lord Jesus Christ.” And having said this unto her he went forth from her
and he departed by road until he came to a city, which is on the seashore. And he went
into the city, and sold all his raiment, and gave the price thereof to the poor and needy, and
he dressed himself in rags like the beggars and he went from one place to another begging
bread and eating it, until he came to the city of Roha (Edessa). And he went into the
church in the city wherein is the picture of our Lord Jesus Christ which our Lord sent unto
Eugyanos, the King of Roha (Edessa), and he prayed before the picture of our Lady
Mariyam and was blessed by her. And he gave thanks unto God, the Most High, and he
went out of the church and sat down with the poor and needy, and he lived upon the bread
of charity. He fasted always until the evening, and he prayed by day and by night, and
wept without ceasing. When his father and his mother came into the marriage-chamber,
and did not find their son Moses, their joy was changed to sorrow. Then Euphemianus
called his servants, and gave them much gold, and he said unto them, “Go ye into every
city and country, two of you into each city, and give alms to the poor from that gold for the
sake of my son Moses.” And two of his father’s servants came to Moses, and gave him
alms with the [other] beggars. Now Saint Moses knew these servants, but they did not
know him, and he said, “I give thanks unto Thee, O my Lord God, that Thou hast esteemed
me fit for this great honor, that is for me to receive alms from the hands of my father’s
servants for the love of Thy Name.” Now his father’s servants continued to go round
about through many cities for many days [seeking him]. After they had returned to
Euphemianus their lord, the father of Saint Moses, the man of God, they said unto him,
“We have come into every city and we have not found thy son.” And Saint Moses, the
man of God, was fasting two days at a time, and then three days at a time, until at length he
did not eat at all except on the First Day of the week. After this our Lady Mariyam
appeared unto one of the righteous elders among the priests of that church, and she said
86

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
unto him, “Go outside the church, and say unto that man who is standing by the pillar,
‘Come, O man of God,’ and bring him into the sanctuary for his fasting, and his prayer,
and his righteousness have ascended like the sweet-smelling incense into heaven.” And on
the following day that priest came to him at the moment when they were offering up the
Offering upon the altar, and asked him to come into the sanctuary. And Moses wept and
entreated him, saying, “Forgive me, O my father! I am a sinner, and I am not worthy to
stand in the holy place.” And the priest said unto him, “O man of God, come into the
sanctuary, for I am sent unto thee”; and he told him how our Holy Lady the Virgin
Mariyam had appeared unto him, and how she had spoken unto him concerning him. And
Moses said unto him, “I am a sinful man, and the greatest sinner in all the world.” After
this he rose up to go to the city of Tarses, which is the city of Paul the Apostle, and he said,
“I will dwell herein until the day of my death.” Then he thought in his heart and said,
“Verily this is the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Name of the Lord is living. I will not
hide myself from any man, and I will not separate myself from the gates of my father’s
house, for who is there among the people here who will know me?” So he went to his
father’s house. And as he was going along he saw his father and very many men following
him, and Moses, the man of God, went and laid hold of the bridle of his father’s horse as
he was sitting on it, and he said unto him, “O good and blessed man, may God forgive thee
thy sins, and grant thee the petition of thy heart. Know now that I am a pilgrim and a
stranger, if thou wishest to feed me with the broken meats of thy table, God the Merciful
will magnify thy reward, if thou wilt have mercy upon my poverty and my wandering.”
When Euphemianus heard these words he thought of the wandering of his son Moses, the
man of God, and tears burst from his eyes and he groaned within himself. And he took
Moses with him into the house, and he commanded his servants to give him a seat before
the door of the house, and they did for him even as he had commanded, and he
commanded one of his slaves to serve him. And Moses, the man of God, said unto that
slave, “I entreat thee, O my brother, to bring me food and drink only on the First Day of
the week, and then only bring me a part of a loaf of bread and a cup of water, after I have
received the Holy Mysteries.” And he continued to lead this life of self-abnegation and
strife for a period of twelve years, sitting at the door of his father’s house. And God
wished to remove him from the toil of this world, and our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto
him, and said unto him, “Blessed art thou, O Moses, My chosen one, for thou hast done
My good pleasure, and thou hast loved sorrow far more than joy, and thou hast forsaken
riches and sought after poverty. I, even I, say unto thee, that everyone who hath called
upon thy name, or hath celebrated thy commemoration, or hath fed the hungry on the day
of thy commemoration, or hath given the thirsty to drink, or hath clothed the naked, or hath
written the book of thy strife, I will reward them with a splendid reward in the kingdom of
the heavens; and in this world I will protect them from all evil, and I will not permit them
to lack any good thing. And now, O my beloved Moses, thou man of God, after four days
I will take thy soul from thy body, and I will set thee with the souls of the righteous, and of
the prophets, and apostles, and martyrs.” And having said these words He gave him
“peace,” and went up into heaven. When the holy man saw this vision he rejoiced and was
exceedingly glad. And he said unto that slave who ministered unto him, “Bring hither to
me paper and ink, and henceforward thou wilt have rest from labor for me”; and the slave
marveled at his words and brought him the paper and ink. And Moses, the man of God,
wrote the full history of his strife, from the beginning even unto the end thereof. On the
fourth day he took the paper, which he had written in his hand, and he died on the First
Day of the week, and his soul went up into the heavens, and the angels and the righteous,
87

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and the martyrs, and the prophets, and the apostles welcomed it, saying, “Hallelujah!
Redeemer our God”, and they came into the heavens. And all the people were gathered
together in the church at the time of the consecration [of the Offering], and they heard a
voice above the altar crying out, and saying, “Blessed are the good servants who have
performed the commandments and the ordinances of their Lord, for they are in joy for
ever.” When the archbishops, and priests, and deacons, and bishops, and all the people
heard this voice, great fear, and severe quaking fell upon them until the end of the
consecration; and they received the Holy Mysteries. And afterwards the archbishops, and
all the priests, and the people entreated our Lord Jesus Christ to reveal unto them this
mystery. And straightway a voice was heard which said, “Rejoice with Moses, the man of
God, in the house of Euphemianus, for behold, he hath delivered up his soul into the hand
of God.” And when the archbishop heard this, he called Euphemianus and said unto him,
“This great joy which dwelt in thy house; Why didst thou not inform me about him so that
we might have visited him during his life and been blessed by him.” And Euphemianus
answered and said unto him, “Thy holy prayer is certain. Thou must know, O holy father,
that I did not know that the like of this man existed in my house.” And straightway the
archbishops, and the priests, and all the people went to the house of Euphemianus, and
they found Moses, the man of God, where he died with the paper in his hand. And the
archbishop took the paper out of his hand, and he read it before all the people until he came
to his name, which was Moses, the man of God, the son of Euphemianus and his mother
Aglaias. When his father and his mother heard this they wept bitterly. Then the
archbishop wrapped him in silk cloths, and they took him and carried him into the church
and laid him in the sanctuary until all the people and the priests had been blessed by him.
And immediately very many sick people came, the deaf and the blind, and they all received
a blessing from his holy body, and they were all healed of their sicknesses. When the
people became very many his father was afraid that they would overturn the body of the
saint from his bier, and he commanded his servants to scatter money among the people.
And the servants scattered much gold in order that they might leave the body of the saint,
but they would not go after the gold, and no man ever returned afterwards to the gold.
After this they laid the body of the saint in the great church of the Apostles Peter and Paul.
And many miracles took place through his body, the blind were made to see, and the dumb
became able to speak, and the sick were healed, and the lame walked, and the deaf heard,
and the lepers were cleansed, and from those who were possessed of devils the devils went
out. [Salutation to] Moses, whose name is written on a pillar of gold in the Jerusalem of
the heavens.
And on this day also died Saint Gabra Krestos, the son of Theodosius, Emperor of
Constantine. Now Theodosius was a God-loving man and one who feared God, and his
wife was a good and God-fearing woman, and her name was Markiza; and they were
sorrowful because they had no son. And they went to Jerusalem, and they made vows, and
they made supplication to God, and He heard them and gave them a son, and they called
his name ‘Abd Almasih, that is to say, Gabra Krestos. And they taught him every kind of
learning on the earth, and there was nothing, which he did not learn. Afterwards they
married him to a princess of Rome, and they brought to him the bride, and they performed
for him all the ceremonies, which are wont to be performed for the bridegroom and bride.
And at midnight Gabra Krestos took the bride by the hand, and they made a covenant
together, and then they recited the prayer of belief--”We believe in one God”--to the end
thereof. Then he stripped off himself the marriage-garments, and dressed himself in coarse
apparel, and he went to the bride and kissed her head, and he bade her farewell, saying
88

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
unto her, “God be with thee, and deliver thee from every evil work of Satan.” And she
wept and said unto him, “Whither goest thou? And to whom wilt thou leave me?” And he
said unto her, “I have thee to God, and I am going to follow Christ, for my father’s
kingdom is a transitory thing. Remember thou thine oath”; and straightway she was silent
and remembered her oath. And he went forth by night whilst those who belonged to the
marriage-chamber were sleeping, and he came to the sea-shore where he found certain men
who were about to sail, and they took him with them. And when his father and his mother
went into the marriage-chamber, and found only the bride and not the bridegroom, they
said unto her, “Where is our son?” And she said unto them, “He came in to me in the
night, and made me swear an oath, and made a covenant with me, and he kissed my head,
and went away from me, and I have passed the night weeping.” When they heard her
words, they fell down upon the ground, on their faces, and they groaned, and uttered loud
cries of grief and lamentation. And the Emperor Theodosius sent out five hundred of his
servants to seek his son, and he gave them much gold to distribute among the poor in alms.
Now Gabra Krestos arrived in the country of Armenia after a journey of one year. And
there was a church built in the name of our Lady Mariyam, and he lived there for five years
fasting and keeping vigil. And two envoys, servants of his father, arrived there, and they
searched for him but were unable to hear any news of him; and they gave alms to the poor,
and Gabra Krestos himself received some of them. After he had dwelt there for five and
twenty years, our holy Lady the Virgin Mariyam appeared unto certain priest, and she said
unto him, “Take the man of God with thee, and let his habitation be inside [the church]”;
and he did as she had commanded him. And Gabra Krestos said, “My Lady, why dost
thou reveal my secret?” And he bade farewell to her picture (or image) and he departed by
night and came to the seashore, where he found a ship in which he embarked. Now he
wished to depart to another country, but by the Will of God he arrived at his father’s city,
and he dwelt there of fifteen years and no man recognized him. And his father’s servants
used to make sport of him; but Saint Gabra Krestos said, “[O God] punish not my father’s
servants for their offence, but take me to Thyself”; and thus saying he died, and they buried
him with honor. As they were burying him they found a paper grasped tightly in his hand
and they were unable to remove it, and they prayed together to the God of heaven; and
when they had prayed the paper was released from his hand, and they read it, and they
knew that he was their son. Then they wept bitterly, and they buried him, and his tomb
became a place where the sick were healed, and where the blind [were made to see], and
where many miracles were wrought, and where countless acts of grace were performed.
Salutation to Gabra Krestos, whose sores the dogs licked in the courtyard of his father’s
house.
And on this day also is commemorated our holy Father Aragawi, who is surnamed ZaMikael. This holy man became a guide to the servants of God on the road. And he went
up to the holy Dabra Damo holding the tail of a serpent, and there he fought countless
noble fights. And God graciously made a covenant with him concerning the man who
should call upon his name, and the man who should celebrate his commemoration, and
then he was hidden from the face of death by the grace of God. He established among his
children the Rules for the Monastic Life, which he had learned in the house of his father
Pachomius. Salutation to Za-Mikael who was surnamed “’Aragawi.”
And on this day also are commemorated Tarakwa the martyr, and those who were with him, and
Damatius, and Emraya the martyr, and the four hundred and thirty-one martyrs who were with her.

Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
89

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TEKEMT 15
(October 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy and honorable Bilamon became a martyr. This holy man was a native
of Nicomedia; his father worshipped idols and his mother was a Christian. They taught
him philosophy and he was well educated, and he passed under the care of a certain priest
whose name was ‘Armalus (Harmalus?), and he taught him the true Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ and he baptized him with Christian baptism. And he fought a strenuous fight, and
God wrought by his hand great miracles and wonders. And there came unto him a certain
blind man so that he might work by his skill some salvation for his eyes, and Saint
Bilamon made the sign of the Cross over the eyes of the blind man, saying, “In the Name
of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit,” and his eyes were relieved straightway, and
he could see with them as in former times, and he was healed. When the king heard the
story of the blind man who was healed of his sickness, he had him brought into his
presence, and he said unto him, “Who was it that healed thine eyes?” And he said unto the
king, “Saint Bilamon healed me by laying his hand upon my eyes, and making the sign of
the Cross, and saying, ‘In the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit,’ and
straightway I saw the light.” And the man who had been blind and had been healed cried
out before the king and said boldly, “I am a Christian.” And the king ordered his soldiers
to cut off the head of the blind man, who had been healed, and straightway they cut off his
head with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven.
Then the king sent and had Saint Bilamon brought to him, and enquired of him concerning
his Faith, and he confessed boldly before him and said unto him, “I am a Christian.” And
the king tried to seduce him by means of much persuasion, and he promised him very
many things, but the saint had no desire for any of the things, which he promised him.
Then was the king wroth with him, and [he cried out] with a loud voice, saying, “If thou
wilt not hearken unto my voice I will inflict upon thee severe torture.” And Saint Bilamon
answered and said unto him, “I am not afraid of thy torture.” And straightway the king
tortured him with severe tortures for many days, by applying one torture at a time, by
beating, by suspension (i.e., crucifixion), by casting him into the sea, and into the fire.
Whilst he was suffering these great tortures our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him in the
form of ‘Armalus (Harmalus?) the priest who baptized him, and he heard His voice, which
was full of joy, saying, “O My chosen one Bilamon, I have made ready for thee and the
heavenly joy which is for ever.” When the king’s soldiers heard this word of joy, they
believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise and glory! And they drew nigh unto
the king, and they cried out, saying, “We believe on our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the
Living God.” And straightway the king commanded his soldiers to cut off their heads with
the sword, and they did so, and at the same time they cut off the head of Saint Bilamon,
and they all received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
Salutation to Askir and Cyriacus.
Salutation to Silas the disciple of Paul.
Twofold salutation to the Apostles of the Father.
90

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also five hundred and sixty people who formed the company of Saint
Pantaleon became martyrs.
And on this day also died Salation, and ‘Atrakius, and Abba Yarpes (Iphrasius), and
Andronicus, and Armolius (Hermolius), and Hermes, and Harmoktis, and the holy women
Admania and Samata, and Father Isaiah, and Silas the disciple of Paul.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 16
(October 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Agathon, the thirty-ninth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. And they chose this father to be archbishop, and they took him and bound
him, and they appointed him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, when Abba Benjamin,
the archbishop who preceded him, died. And great tribulation came because of the
Orthodox Faith. In his days there was a certain man whose name was Theodosius, a
Melchite, and he went and came to the city of Damascus, to King Yazed, and he gave him
presents and much money, and Yazed appointed him governor of Alexandria, and the
North, and Mareotis. When he came to the city of Alexandria he afflicted our father
Archbishop Agathon, and he levied tax upon him, and he took from [each of] his disciple's
thirty-six gold dinars. And he compelled Agathon to give him money for the service of the
emperor’s ships each year, and the archbishop gave seven hundred gold dinars each year.
Now because of the evil of this man Theodosius, his fellow Melchite did not associate with
him, for he hated him because of the evil, which he did to the Archbishop Abba Agathon.
And our father the archbishop was not able to go out of his cell until God had destroyed
that evil man. And in the days of this father the building of the holy church of the blessed
Abba Macarius was completed. One night the angel of the Lord appeared unto this father,
and he made known to him that in the country of the Fayyum there was a certain righteous
monk whose name was John, and he belonged to the church of Saint Abba Macarius. And
the angel commanded him to send and bring him to him so that he might help him in
admonishing the people and in teaching them; and the angel said also unto him, “He shall
be archbishop after thee.” And straightway Abba Agathon sent and brought the monk, and
he delivered to him the work of the churches, and the ordering and teaching and
admonishing of the people. And this Father Agathon died through overwork, and he held
his office for fully nineteen years and he died in peace. Salutation to Abba Agathon.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Abba Macrobius, and Saint Abba ‘Eblo (or
Apollo), and Saint Abba Peter the disciple of Abba Isaiah the anchorite. Salutation to
Macrobius, ‘Eblo, and Peter.
And on this day also are commemorated Paracu, and the five and forty righteous men of
El-Derke, and Aaron the fighter, and Karbu, and ‘Analyu, and Abba Pawli, and Mark, and
Gadel.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
91

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TEKEMT 17
(October 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Filias the martyr, bishop the country of Tamias, in the days of
Kuelkuelianus. They brought Saint Filias in before the company of the governors, and
Kuelkuelianus said unto him, “Sacrifice to the gods”; and Filias said, “I will not offer up
sacrifice except to God, and to Him alone.” Kuelkuelianus said, “What kind of sacrifice
doth God wish?” And Filias answered and said, “A pure heart and righteous judgment,
and the word which is true; such are the sacrifices wherewith God is well pleased.”
Kuelkuelianus said, “Did not Paul sacrifice?” and Filias said, “God forbid!”
Kuelkuelianus said unto him, “Did not Moses sacrifice?” And Filias said, “Unto the Jews
only was the command given that they should sacrifice in Jerusalem.” Kuelkuelianus said,
“Dost thou strive on behalf of the soul or the body?” And Filias said, “On behalf of soul
and body.” Kuelkuelianus said, “Will this body rise?” And Filias said, “Yea.”
Kuelkuelianus said, “Hast thou no love for wife or brethren?” And Filias said, “The love
of God is greater than every other love.” Kuelkuelianus said, “Who is God?” Filias raised
his hand to heaven, and said, “God is He Who made the heavens and the earth and
everything which is therein,” and he told him the story of His Birth, and His Crucifixion,
and His Death, and His Resurrection and Ascension. Kuelkuelianus said, “Can God be
crucified?” And Filias said, “Because of love for us He came into the world, and redeemed
us by His Passion.” Kuelkuelianus said, “Dost thou not know that I would honor thee, and
that I do not wish to harm thee, for I know concerning the abundance of thy wealth, and
the honor of thy family. Now, sacrifice thou to the gods so that thou mayest not die an evil
death.” And Filias said, “If thou dost wish to give me pleasure, give the order for my
torturing and slaughter”; and Kuelkuelianus gave the order for him to be killed. As they
were taking him away his brother came with the magnates of the city, and he besought him
with many entreaties, grasping at his feet and kissing his hands as he did so, to submit to
the governor and to offer up sacrifice. And Filias cursed them, saying, “Leave me, O ye
who would lead me into error, I m going to bear the Cross of my God.” And when he
arrived at the place where he was to receive his doom, he stretched out his hands towards
the East, and he prayed unto our Lord Jesus Christ for a long time. And he committed
himself to his people, and bade them farewell in peace, and then he was crowned.
Salutation to Filias, who feared not the governor.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Gregory, the brother of the blessed Basil.
And on this day also died Saint Dioscorus, the thirty-first Archbishop of the city of
Alesancria, who was appointed after Abba John. This father was gentle in disposition, and
his knowledge was glorious, and his work was good, and he was perfect in his days, but his
family did not resemble him, and he was appointed archbishop by the Holy Ghost. And he
wrote a General Epistle and sent it to the holy father and doctor of the Church, Abba
Severus, Archbishop of the city of Antioch; and he wrote in that Epistle the Orthodox Faith
of the Holy Three Who are equal in Godhead. Then he went on to speak about the
Incarnation of the Son of God, and he said, “The Word of God took a body, perfect in all
its operations, with a rational and understanding soul from our holy Lady the Virgin
Mariyam. And He became therein One Son, and One Person, in inseparable unity, and He
did not become two, but One, for the Holy Three were One God, before the Incarnation of
92

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the Son, and after the Incarnation of the Son there came not upon Him any addition to His
Incarnation.” When his Epistle reached Saint Abba Severus, and he had read it, he rejoiced
and was glad therein with an exceedingly great gladness. And he preached about it before
the people of the city of Antioch, and they all rejoiced therein. Then Saint Abba Severus
wrote to him, and accepted his Epistle, saying, in his letter, “I give thanks unto God Who
hath chosen thee for this glorious and Orthodox Christian office,” and he commanded him
not to turn aside from it neither to the right hand nor to the left, and that all his words and
works should be performed according to the Orthodox Faith which our holy fathers had
formulated, that is to say the Three Hundred and Eighteen bishops who assembled in
Nicea, and according to what they had commanded in the Canon and the Law. And then
he said in his letter, “Teach thy people continually, so that they may be strong in the
Orthodox Faith, and let them discuss this matter very much.” And when the letter of Abba
Severus reached Dioscorus, he rejoiced therein greatly, and he commanded that it should
be read from the pulpit. And this father taught the people continually, and read to them the
Holy Scriptures, and commanded all the priests in the cities to shepherd their flocks, and to
protect the sheep, which had been committed to their charge. Having ended his good
course, and pleased God, he died in peace. Salutation to Dioscorus the writer.
And on this day also died Stephen, Archdeacon and Protomartyr. Salutation to Stephen.

Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 18
(October 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Theophilus, the twenty-third Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. He was appointed in the sixth year of the reign of Theodosius the Great. In
his days lived John of the Golden Mouth (Chrysostom), of the city of Antioch, who
translated the Gospel of John, the son of Zebedee, and he also translated the Book of Paul
the apostle. He was appointed Archbishop of the city of Constantinople, when the days of
this father were twenty-eight years, and he died in exile. And in the days of this father
there lived also Epipahanius, Bishop of Cyprus; and in his days also died Abba Cyril,
Bishop of Jerusalem; and in his days also rose up (i.e., awoke) the seven children after they
had been asleep for three hundred and seventy-two years. And this holy father was a
disciple of Athanasius, the apostolic Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and this Saint
Theophilus was brought up in the cell of Saint Athanasius, and he learned from him all
spiritual doctrine. When Abba Timothy the archbishop died, this father was appointed in
his place. And he was prudent, and observant, and he learned the Books of the Church by
heart, and he understood the interpretation of the same. During the days of his office he
wrote great discourses, and many works of exhortation concerning love (i.e., charity), and
concerning the Resurrection and the punishment, which is prepared for sinners, and other
treatises, which tend to edification. And Saint Abba Cyril was the son of the sister of this
father, and he brought him up most carefully and piously. And he sent him to Abba
93

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Serapion so that he might instruct him carefully and thoroughly in spiritual matters, and
father Abba Serapion taught him every kind of spiritual learning, and he learned by heart
all the Books of the Church. When his education was complete Abba Theophilus sent and
brought him to his cell. And used to make him read before him continually books
concerning the people. When this father Abba Theophilus was with Abba Athanasius, he
one day saw him lifting up his eyes to a hill, now he was [standing] before his cell, and he
heard him say, “If I find good days I will clear away this hill, and I will build on the site
thereof a church to Saint John the Baptist and Elias the prophet.” And when this Father
Abba Theophilus was appointed Archbishop of Alexandria he remembered that hill
concerning which he heard Abba Athanasius speak, and determined that he would do and
carry out what he had heard Abba Athanasius say he would do. And in those days there
was in the city of Rome a certain woman who was exceedingly rich; now her husband was
dead, and he had left her much property, and she had two sons. And she took her two sons,
and the money, which she had with her, and a picture of the angel Raphael, and she
departed from the city of Rome to the city of Alexandria. And when she heard Abba
Theophilus speaking about that hill, straightway she became moved by the zeal of the
Spirit, and she spent much money and cleared away that hill, and there appeared
underneath it a coffer which was covered over with a slab of stone whereon were written
(or engraved) three characters which were O O O. As soon as Theophilus saw them he
knew their mystery through the Holy Spirit, and he said, “Behold, the time hath arrived
wherein this coffer should be brought to light, for the three characters upon it are O O O,
and behold, they were gathered together at the same time. One O standeth for Theos, that
is God; the second O standeth for the Emperor Theodosius, and the third O standeth for
Theophilus the archbishop, that is to say a holy three (?).” And having said this he opened
the coffer and found written inside it the date according to the Era of King Alexander, the
son of Philip, the Macedonian, and it was seven hundred years, from the time when they
closed [the coffer]. And the Archbishop Abba Theophilus sent to the Emperor Theodosius
the Less, the son of the Emperor Arcadius, the son of Theodosius the Great, and he
informed him about the coffer, and how he had opened it, and he said, “Come, that thou
mayest see it.” And the emperor came to the city of Alexandria, and he looked at the
coffer, and he gave half of the treasure inside it to the blessed Theophilus, and a half of it
he placed in a ship and took to the city of Constantinople. And the blessed Theophilus
built churches with the gold, which the emperor had given him. And he began to build
first of all a church in the names of John the Baptist and Saint Elijah, and he translated
their bodies and laid them in it, and this church is well known to this day in Demas. And
at that time he also built a church in the name of our holy Lady the Virgin Mariyam, by the
hands of the Melchites in the east of the city. And thirdly, he built a church in the name of
the angel Raphael in Daset, and he built seven other churches; and then he appointed the
sons of that widow bishops. When the emperor saw the love of the archbishop for building
churches, he gave him all the houses of idols which were in the whole country of Egypt,
and Theophilus pulled them down and built on their sites churches and lodging houses for
strangers and pilgrims, and he endowed them with land and other property. And having
followed in this good course of action, and pleased God, he departed to God and went to
his rest from the toil of this world, after sitting upon the throne of Mark the evangelist
eight and twenty years. When this father administered Christian baptism he used to see a
rod of light before him making the sign of the Cross over the place of baptism. And this
father and the Emperor Theodosius were cutting wood, and each of the two saw a vision on
the same night wherein it seemed that one of them was to become emperor and the other
94

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
archbishop; and it came to pass to them even as they had seen in the vision. In the first
year wherein this father was made archbishop, the Emperor Theodosius commanded that
each of them should write down their belief in books, and that they should bring them to
the emperor, and they did as he had commanded and brought the books to the emperor.
When they had drawn nigh unto him, the emperor rose up and prayed, and then he laid the
books on the altar. And God revealed unto him that there was nothing in them about the
Orthodox Faith except that they said and believed that “the Son with the Father and with
the Holy Spirit is One God.” And the emperor commanded [his servants] to cast forth all
the books wherein evil belief and words of doubt (or hypocritical words) were written, and
the emperor expelled all those who were in doubt about their belief from his kingdom.
And John of the Mouth of Gold multiplied his reading in the Books of ‘Awgaryos
(Abgarus), and this father Theophilus sent a message to Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, and
to all his own bishops, ordering them to anathematize the Books of ‘Awgaryos (Abgarus),
and they anathematized them even as did Theophilus the archbishop. When John of the
Mouth of Gold heard that Abba Theophilus the Archbishop of the city of Alexandria had
anathematized the Books of ‘Awgaryos (Abgrus), he abandoned them and never read them
again. And [he died] the seven hundred and twenty-first year of King Alexander, the Twohorned (A.D. 410). Salutation to Theophilus who was worthy to sit upon the throne of
Mark the evangelist.
And on this day also died Romanus the martyr in the days of Asclepianus, the governor
who persecuted the Christians. This Romanus had been a monk from his earliest years,
and he devoted himself strenuously to fasting and prayer. When he heard that the governor
was persecuting the Christians, he came into the church, and he gathered together the
priests and the deacons, and admonished them in the Faith of Christ, and strengthened
them with his own confidence. When Asclepianus heard this he commanded that
Romanus should be summoned, and when Romanus stood before him, he said unto him,
“Is it true that thou art the son of Feyum?” Romanus said unto him, “What doth glory of
kin profit me? My glory is Jesus Christ.” When Asclepianus heard this he commanded his
soldiers to hang him up and to scrape his limbs piecemeal [and they did so], and when the
governor saw his patient endurance, he commanded them to slit his cheeks so that he might
not be able to talk. And Romanus said, “Behold, my God hath uncovered my mouth so
that I may admonish thy madness. If thou wouldst know the truth of the matter, command
thy servants to bring hither a child, and he will tell us whether it is right for us to worship
God or the gods.” And the governor commanded them to bring a little child, and he said
unto him, “Tell me is it right for us to worship God or the gods.” And the child said, “It is
right for us to worship God Who created all the world with one word”; and having heard
him the governor commanded them to hang up the child. When they had hung up the child
his mother came to look at him, and the child said unto his mother, “Give me water, for I
am thirsty.” And his mother said unto him, “Nay, O my son, thou must not drink water
[here], but go to the water of life.” When the governor heard her words he commanded
them to cut off the head of the child; [and they did so], and his mother came and took away
his body. And the governor commanded them to cut out the tongue of Romanus at its
roots so that he might not be able to argue with him. And Romanus having received by the
grace of God a tongue of the Spirit, he wrote with his blood, saying, “Blessed are those
who do not deny our Lord, for the Son will confess them before His Father.” When
Asclepianus heard this he imagined that the tongue of Romanus had not been cut out, and
he called to the prefect, and said unto him, “Why didst thou not cut out his tongue at its
roots?” And the soldier said, “Command them to bring the soldiers and I will cut out his
95

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
tongue before thee, and thou shalt say if he speaketh.” And straightway they brought the
soldiers and they cut out his tongue, and he died forthwith. When the governor saw him he
commanded the soldiers to bring him into the prison house, and there they hanged (or
strangled) him; thus he finished his martyrdom. Salutation to Romanus the martyr.
And on this day also are commemorated John the martyr, and ‘Adrani, and ‘Artematewos,
and Hephaestus, and Luderius, and ‘Asmanit, and his seven children.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 19
(October 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Bartholomew and his wife. These saints were natives of the country
of Fayyum, to the west of Egypt, and they were accused before the governor of being
Christians. And the governor sent and had them brought to him, and he questioned them
about their belief and they confessed our Lord Christ before him. And he commanded his
soldiers to dig a deep pit and to throw the two into it, and to cast stones in on them; and the
soldiers did as the governor had commanded them, and Bartholomew and his wife finished
their strife; and received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation
to Bartholomew and his wife who were buried alive [in the days of the Emperor
Diocletian].
On this day also the holy General Council assembled in the church of the city of Antioch
because of Paul of Samosata. This wretched man was a native of the city of Samidat, and
was made Archbishop of Antioch. And Satan sowed bad seed in his heart, and he used to
believe that Christ was a mere man whom God created, and that God chose Him so that by
Him He might redeem the children of men, and that the source of Christ was Mariyam
entirely, and that His Godhead was not one with His manhood, but that it descended upon
Him, and that He dwelt therein by the Will of God, One Nature; and he would confess
neither the Son nor the Holy Spirit. And this Council assembled in the city of Antioch
because of him, and this assembling took place in the reign of the Emperor Valerius, when
Dionysius was Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and Dionysius was Archbishop of the
city of Rome; and this Council assembled before the Council of Nicea five and forty years.
Now Abba Dionysius, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, was old, and he was not able
to come with them into the Council, but he wrote a letter to the Council, saying, “Christ is
the Word of God, and is His Son, and is equal with Him in Godhead and Nature. And the
Trinity [containeth] Three distinct Persons, and one God and one Lord. And One [Person]
of the Trinity, that is to say, the Son, became incarnate in the substance of a complete man,
and there was with Him One Nature.” Then Dionysius testified concerning these things
and adduced many testimonies from the Old and New Testaments. And Dionysius sent
this letter with two priests and thirteen bishops assembled and they debated the matter with
Paul the infidel. And they read out before him the letter of Dionysius, and they rebuked
him with the words of Paul the apostle, who said, “Christ is the Word of God, and He is
His Son, and the splendor of His glory, and the likeness of His glory, and the Substance of
96

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Godhead.” But he would not accept their words, and he would not turn from his infidelity,
and they cut him off, and anathematized him and excommunicated him, and they
excommunicated all those who believed his words, and drove them from their thrones.
And the Council formulated Canons, and they are in the hands of the believers who
perform their Laws and Precepts. Salutation to the two priests and thirteen bishops.
On this day also died Saint John of Dailam. The parents of this holy man belonged to the
nobles of the city; his father’s name was Abraham, and his mother’s name was Sara, and
they continued to pray fervently for many days because they had no children. One day two
monks came to visit him, and they sojourned in his house, and they said unto him, “O
Abraham, hast thou no children?” And he said unto them with tears, “O my fathers, I have
not gotten a son. And now I have grown old, and as for my wife her days are past”; when
the monks heard this they prayed over them, and blessed them and departed. After a few
days Sara, the wife of Abraham, conceived and she brought forth a child of joy, and
Abraham called his name John. When fourteen years had passed, and when the boy had
finished all his instruction in the Books of the Church, those two same monks came into
the school, and when John saw them he asked them to take him away with them. And they
said, “We are afraid of thy father and we cannot take thee.” Whilst those monks were
departing to their abode John prayed to God that He would direct the path which he had
chosen, and he went out of the school and followed the monks, and whilst wishing to
overtake them he came to a great river which he was afraid [to try] to cross by himself.
Whilst he was there certain Arabs came with their camels, and John asked them to take
him across the river, and they took him over with them; and by the Will of God he arrived
in the monastery of these monks. Now the name of one of these monks was Abba Simon,
and when he saw John he knew him, and he received him, and made him his disciple and
Abba Simon had two other disciples besides John, but he loved John more than them.
When Abba Simon knew that his departure was nigh, he said unto his children, “O my
children, I will tell you what God hath shown me in respect of what shall happen unto you
after my death. One of you a hyena shall seize, another of you shall be scattered in the
earth, and of my third disciple the report shall go forth into all the world.” Then the old
man looked in the face of John, and he said unto him, “Be strong, O my son, for the love of
Christ, for He hath chosen thee to be a father unto many”; and thus saying the old man
died. After three days one disciple went out into the world and married a wife, and where
the second went is not known. And Saint John was sorrowful in his soul and he said, “I
will go down and see what hath happened to my companion.” As he was going down a
company of soldiers of Dailam met him, and they made him prisoner, and fettered him
with two beautiful women, one on his right hand and one on his left. Whilst they were
journeying along the road the men of Dailam lacked water both for themselves and for
their beasts. And Saint John said unto them, “Masters, if I make water to spring forth for
you will ye let me go?” And they said unto him, “Yea.” Then Saint John knelt upon the
ground in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and water gushed out
upon them and they drank. And Saint John said unto them, “Perform to me what ye have
covenanted,” and they said, “We will not let thee go; who shall we find like unto thee?”
So they brought him to their city. And in those days a heavy plague descended upon
Dailam, and the master of Saint John died, and his children, and all the men of his house,
and there remained only his wife and her daughter. And the wife of Saint John’s master
thought that he was a magician, and she shut up Saint John in his room, and set fire to the
house so that she might burn him alive, but God delivered him. When the men of Dailam
saw this they all believed through him, and they were baptized, men and women. Then
97

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
John departed thence by another road. When he found that the men there worshipped
trees, he exhorted them to turn from iniquity, and when they refused to do so he came by
night among their trees, and prayed to God, and taking an axe [in his hand], he said, “In the
Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost I will cut you down”; and straightway
one thousand trees fell down at one stroke of the axe. When the men of the city saw this
they believed, and were baptized together with their women and children. And once again
he went to another city, and he found that the people there were worshippers in firetemples. When John rebuked them, they were wroth, and they cast him into the fire three
times, but he came forth unharmed. And he turned their water into blood, and they lacked
water to drink, and they all believed in the God of Saint John, and forty thousand men were
baptized. Then he built a church and performed countless signs and wonders, and he died
in the country of Der’Eyan. Salutation to John of Dailam.
Salutation to Abba Simon, who was enveloped by the Holy Ghost.
And on this day also are commemorated the righteous men of Al-Matra, who were slain
with violence by the hands of evil men. [The Bodleian MS. says they were slain by King
Yemraha.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 20
(October 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great father of light, Abba John the Short. This holy man was a native
of the city, which is called Tansa and is in Upper Egypt, and he had one brother. His
parents were righteous people, and they feared God; they were not rich in the goods and
possessions of this world, but they were rich in good works. When this holy man was
eighteen years of age, the grace of God moved him to go to the desert of Scete, which
[name] being interpreted means, “Balance of hearts.” And he wished to put on the garb of
the monk. And he found a certain tried and strong old man, whose name was Abba
Bamoy, of the city of Seha, dwelling in Scete, and Saint John bowed low before him and
entreated him that he might dwell with him in Scete. And Saint Abba Bamoy wished to try
him, and he said unto him, “O my son, it is not right for thee to live here, for this is a very
hard desert, and those who dwell therein have to work with their hands, and they can only
feed themselves by hard toil. And also over and above this there are very many fasts to be
kept, and many prayers, both by day and by night, to be said, and a man must sleep on the
bare ground naked without a bed (or cushion), and there is very great hardship in this
desert. Nay, my son, go back into the world and live a life of comfort and ease like unto
that of all other men.” And Abba John said unto him, “O my father, for God’s sake do not
turn me back for I have come to be under thy authority and under the shadow of thy prayer.
And if thou wilt accept me I believe that God will make thy heart will-disposed towards
me.” Now Saint Abba Bamoy was wont never to do anything hastily, and he entreated
God concerning Abba John so that He might reveal to him His works. And the angel of
the Lord appeared and said unto him, “God saith unto thee; accept this brother, for he shall
98

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
become a chosen vessel.” And when Abba Bamoy heard these words from the angel of
God, he brought Abba John into the church, and he shaved off the hair of his head. Then
he laid out the garb of the monk, and he stood and prayed over it for three days and three
nights. Then the angel of the Lord appeared, and made the sign of the Cross over the
raiment of monkhood, and Abba Bamoy put it upon Abba John. And Abba John devoted
himself with the greatest zeal and diligence to the splendid works of the ascetic life. One
day Abba Bamoy wished to try him, and he sent Abba John away from him, saying, “I
cannot live with thee”; and Abba John stood for seven days outside the gates of the
monastery, and every day Abba Bamoy went out to Abba John, and smote him with a
stick, and Abba John bowed down before him and said, “Forgive me, O my father.” On
the seventh day the old man Abba Bamoy went forth to go to the church, and he saw seven
angels, and they had with them seven crowns which they were placing on the head of Abba
John. And straightway Abba Bamoy took Abba John and brought him into his cell, and
from that day onward he was held by him in honor and reverence. One day Abba Bamoy
found a piece of dry wood and he gave it to Abba John and he said unto him, “Take this
wood and plant it in the ground, and water it until it sprouteth and bringeth forth fruit.”
And Abba John obeyed Abba Bamoy, and he took that piece of wood, and planted it, and
watered it each day twice; now the water was far off, a distance of twelve stadia. And after
three years that piece of wood sprouted, and grew into a large tree, and bore fruit, and the
old man Abba Bamoy took some of the fruit thereof and carried it to all the aged monks,
and he said unto them, “Take ye and eat of the fruit of obedience and humility.” When the
monks saw this miracle they marveled exceedingly, and they praised God Who gives this
virtue unto those who make themselves subject to His teachers. And Abba Bamoy fill sick
of a very severe sickness, and he continued to suffer from this sickness for eighteen years,
and though Abba John ministered unto him [all this time] he never once said unto him,
“Thou hast done well,” for the old man Abba Bamoy had grown very old, and he used to
try him exceedingly. And God tried him with such a severe sickness until at length he
became like a piece of dry wood, so that he might become a chosen offering unto God.
When Abba Bamoy was about to die, he gathered together the aged monks, and he seized
the hand of Abba John and gave it unto them, saying, “Take him, and take care of this
man, for he is an angel and not a man.” Then he said unto Abba John, “After I am dead I
will live in the place wherein thou didst plant the tree which sprouted and bore fruit, for
thou in that place didst become a holy and acceptable sacrifice before God. And many
men shall be saved by thy hand, and thy memorial shall be there in that place before God
for ever.” When Abba Bamoy had said this unto him, he opened his mouth and delivered
up his soul into the hand of God. After this Abba John departed to that place [where the
tree was] according as the old man Abba Bamoy had told him. And he strove boldly in the
working of righteousness, for his name was exalted exceedingly; and after this he was
appointed abbot over his church. And whilst the archbishop was laying his hand upon him
at the time of his appointment, a voice came from heaven, and all the people heard it,
saying, “Axios, Axios, Axios,” that is to say, “He is worthy, He is worthy, He is worthy.”
And every time when Saint John consecrated the Offering, he would watch for those who
were worthy to partake and those who were not worthy. Now Abba Theophilus, the
archbishop, built a church to the Three Holy Children in the city of Alexandria, and he
wished to bring thereto the bodies of the Three Children from the city of Babylon. And he
asked Saint Abba John to go to the city of Babylon, and to bring the bodies of the Three
Children from the city of Babylon, and after many requests Abba John went forth on
behalf of the archbishop. And a cloud straightway carried him away and brought him to
99

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the city of Babylon, and he saw that city, and the rivers and the palaces thereof, and he saw
the bodies of the Saints, the Three Children, and the body of King Nebuchadnezzar lying
in their tombs. And Saint Abba John bowed low, and embraced the bodies of the saints
with tears, and he cried out saying, “O my holy fathers, bless me!” And straightway he
heard a voice from their bodies, saying, “The God of Israel hath blessed thee.” When
Abba John had heard this voice he was filled with the Holy Spirit, and rejoiced in the
spiritual blessing. And he said unto them (i.e., the bodies), “O my fathers, ye martyrs of
Christ God, I tell you that our father the archbishop, Abba Theophilus, has built a church in
your names in the city of Alexandria, and he hath sent me unto you and he beseeches you
and your holy bodies to come and dwell in your church, so that there may be healing and
salvation unto all those who believe in Christ in all the country of Egypt.” And the saints
answered with one voice and said unto him, “God shall give thee the reward of thy labor in
the life everlasting! But tell the archbishops that God hath commanded [us] not to remove
our bodies from this place until the day of the Resurrection. Nevertheless because of his
contendings, and his labor, and his perfect faith, let them suspend lamps, on the night of
the day of the consecration of the church, whilst all the people and the priests are
assembled therein, and we ourselves will come and we will make manifest the power of
God and their blessing.” And Saint Abba John bowed low, and went forth from their
presence rejoicing in God. When he had departed a short distance from them, a cloud took
him up and brought him to the outskirts of the city of Alexandria, and he came in to the
archbishop and told him what the saints had said; and the archbishop did even as the saints
had told him. And when midnight had come on the night of the day of the consecration of
the church, the Three Holy Children appeared in the church surrounded by brilliant light,
and they lighted all the lamps, and they sent forth from themselves an exceedingly sweet
odor. After this Abba John returned to Scete, and he contended in the working of
righteousness by night and by day. One day a certain monk came into the cave of Abba
John, and he found him lying down, and the angels of God were waving their wings over
him, and each of them was saying to the other, “Let me lay my wing upon him.” After this
the pagan Barbarians came to the desert of Scete to plunder the houses of the monks, and
to slay the monks. After this Saint Abba John went to the monastery of Saint Abba
Anthony in the desert of Kuelzem [by the Red Sea], not that he was afraid of death, but he
said, “I go that a pagan may not come and kill me, and go to Sheol because of me; I do not
wish to be in a state of ease and for that pagan to suffer punishment on my account. For he
might testify against me before the Lord God, though he is my brother in nature, and form,
and likeness.” And Abba John dwelt by the side of a village, and God brought him from it
a certain man who was a believer, and he ministered unto him until the time of his death.
When God wished to give him rest from the labor of this world, He sent unto him His
righteous saints, Abba Anthony, and Abba Macarius, and Abba Pachomius, to comfort him
and to inform him concerning his departure, and there was with them Abba Bamoy, his
spiritual father. And they comforted him and said unto him, “Be strong in the Lord, and
rejoice in the everlasting joy which God hath prepared. Be thou ready, for we will come to
thee at dawn on the First Day of the week, and we will take thee with us into everlasting
life, even as God hath commanded”; and they blessed him and disappeared. On the day of
the Eve of the Sabbath Saint Abba John sent his attendant to the village, for he was sick
with a little sickness. And when it was the time of cock-crow on the night of the holy First
Day of the week, behold there came unto him many hosts of angels, and all the company of
the saints, and when he saw them he rejoiced and bowed low and delivered up his soul into
the hand of God. And the holy angels received the soul of the blessed Abba John, and they
100

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
took it up with them into heaven. And at that moment his attendant came, and he saw his
soul as they were carrying it up into heaven, and the holy angels were surrounding it, and
were singing before it. And before all these, as it was shining brightly like the sun, one
sang and praised the blessed man Abba John. And he stood still for the space of an hour as
he marveled at what he saw. And straightway the angel of the Lord came unto him and
told him the names of each one of the saints, and pointing with his finger at the saints he
said unto [the attendant of] Abba John, “This is Abba Pachomius, this is Abba Macarius,
this is Abba Bamoy, and this is Abba So-and-so.” And the attendant said unto the angel,
“Who is this in front of them who is shining like the sun?” And the angel said unto him,
“This is Abba Anthony, the father of all the monks.” When the attendant came to the cell
he found Abba John on his knees, and he wept over him with a great weeping. And he
made haste and went to the village, and told the men how that the saint was dead. Then the
brethren came and made him ready for burial, and they bore away his body with great
honor, and when they had brought him into the village, great wonders and miracles
happened through his body. And then his sons, the monks, came and took up his body and
they carried it to the desert of Scete and laid it in the church thereof, and it became a haven
for everyone who took refuge therein. Salutation to Abba John.
And on this day also died Saint Elisa the prophet, whose name being interpreted is “Savior,
protector and king.” This holy man was native of a village the name of which was
Be’Elamon, of the tribe of Isaachar, and he prophesied many prophecies concerning the
children of Israel. And he also prophesied saying, “God shall come down upon the earth
and shall walk with men.” And he gave a sign of this, saying, “The sun shall set in Selom
(Silo), and one of its two halves shall be separated from the other, and twelve oak trees
shall be useful to the Lord, and submissive to the holy God, Who shall come down upon
the earth, and by it the whole earth shall be saved.” When he finished his prophecy he died
in peace and was buried in his own land. Salutation to Elisa the prophet who made the
bitter water sweet and raised the axe out of the water by means of a splinter of wood.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 21
(October 31)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated a festival of commemoration of our holy Lady the Virgin
Mariyam. Salutation to thee, O Mariyam, on whom the Sun of Righteousness rose.
Salutation unto thee, O garden of stacte and cassia.
And on this day also is commemorated the translation of the body of Saint Lazarus, whom
our Lord raised from the dead. And one of the Christian emperors, having heard the
history of the saint whilst he was in the island of Cyprus, translated his body to the city of
Constantinople. When they wanted to translate it [the workmen] found the saint’s body
buried under the earth and laid in a stone sarcophagus. And there was cut upon it in
[letters of] gold the following: “This is the body of Saint Lazarus, the friend of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whom He raised from the dead, after [he had lain] in the grave four days.”
101

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
When they found the body they rejoiced with great joy, and they carried it to
Constantinople, and the priest went out and received it with great honor, and with psalms,
and hymns, and prayers, and incense; and they laid it in the sanctuary until they could
build a church for it, and translated the body thither. And they made a great festival in
honor thereof on this day. Salutation to the emperor who translated the body of Lazarus to
Antioch (sic) from Cyprus.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba John, Archbishop of the holy city of
Jerusalem in the days of the God-loving King David, (A.D. 1411-1413) the grandson of the
King Sayf’Ar’Ad. Now this father was the son of Christian parents, who feared God, and
they belonged to the city of Mesr (Cairo); and they reared the holy man [piously] and
called him John. When he grew up they taught him Christian doctrine, and when he was
fit to serve in the grade of deacon he was appointed a deacon. And having performed the
duties of a deacon well and carefully, and was fit for the grade of priest, he was appointed
priest. And he devoted himself strenuously to fasting and to prayer, and above all he gave
himself to the fear of God and to the love of pilgrims; thereupon he became fit for the
grade of apostleship. By the Will of God he was appointed bishop in the holy city of
Jerusalem, and he fought a good fight therein, and he taught the people in humility and in
the fear of God. And they loved him exceedingly because of his holiness, and his goodly
figure, and his open countenance which was as that of an angel of God. After he had been
seated on his throne for a few years. Satan brought a trial upon him and removed him from
his people and from his city. And this was in the days when Abba Mark was archbishop of
Alexandria. And the King of Mesr (Cairo), a Hanafite, forced him to send an embassy to
the King of Ethiopia, who was in submission to him, concerning the Muslims who dwelt
under his rule. Now there was in his days a king, whose name was Sayf’Ar’Ad, and he
was also named Constantine, and he slew many of the Muslims who rebelled against him,
and some of them he drove out of his country and they went to the King of Mesr (Cairo)
and took refuge with him. And they said, “The King of Ethiopia hath made an end of the
Muslims; some of them he hath slain, and some of them he hath made Christians.” When
the King of Mesr (Cairo) heard thee words, his zeal for his religion rose up, and he
compelled the archbishop to dispatch elders to [Ethiopia], and he told him that he held him
as hostage for the obedience of the King of Ethiopia and the safety of the other Muslims
who were in his kingdom. And our father the archbishop and his bishops agreed with the
Government of Mesr (Cairo) concerning those who were to be sent to the King of Ethiopia,
and they chose those fathers, those shining stars, because of their holiness, and learning,
and wisdom, that is to say the honorable father Abba John, and the learned and prudent
father Abba Cyril, Bishop of ‘Akhnas, and he forced them to go to the frontier of Ethiopia,
and God-loving King Sayf’Ar’Ad, may God rest his soul! Amen, heard concerning them,
and he rejoiced with exceeding great joy; and he sent his soldiers to them with presents and
mules to receive them, and when they had come to the king he paid them exceedingly great
honor. And after they had read to him the letter of our father the archbishop, they wished
to return to their thrones, and to their peoples, and to their churches, but the lord king
prevented them from departing because he loved their holiness, and because he loved their
persons, and their priestly service, and their faces which were full of grace, for they were
like unto [those of] the angels of God, and they shone like the sun; and the lord king loved
them with a great love because of their holiness and their prayers. After a short time God
wished, in His mercy, to remove this father Abba John from the labor of this transitory
world, and He brought upon him a slight illness, and he died at a good old age, now his
102

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
work was well-pleasing unto God, in the eleven hundred and sixth year of the Era of the
Righteous Martyrs (A.D. 1390).
And on this day died the great [prophet] Joel. This righteous man prophesied in the days
of ‘Abya (Abijah) the son of Jeroboam, the son of Solomon the king. He taught the
people, and admonished them, and prophesied concerning the dwelling of God of Zion,
and concerning His Passion, and concerning the descent of the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete,
upon the holy Apostles on the day of the festival of Pentecost. And he revealed that they
would prophesy, their daughters, and their sons, and their old men, and their young men,
and the women who dwelt with them. “And if there be a prophet who prophesies, I will
pour out My Spirit upon all men” (Joel ii. 28); and I will not pour except [on] the Apostles.
Now of this passage there are two interpretations; I, Because the holy Apostles were
perfect in working righteousness he called them “men,” for he who is not perfect among
men in doing the good pleasure of God is not called a “man”; II, From the Apostles the
Holy Spirit was poured out upon all the believing saints from the time of their preaching to
the day of the Resurrection. And this prophet prophesied also concerning the going forth
of the Law of the Gospel from Zion, when he said, “A stream of water shall flow forth
from the house of God, and it shall water the valley of Shittim” (Joel iii.18). And he made
known that after the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ war should break out on the earth,
and he spoke also concerning the day of the Resurrection. And he said, “The sun shall
become dark, and the moon shall become like blood, and the light of the stars shall be
hidden” (Joel ii. 31). Now this prophet prophesied more than a thousand years before the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. This righteous man belonged to the tribe of Reuben, and
he arrived at a good old age, and he pleased God and died in peace, and was buried in the
fields. Salutation to Joel the prophet, the son of Batuel, whose tongue was sharper than a
razor.
And on this day our Lady Mariyam wrought a miracle and delivered Matthias from the
prison house.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 22
(November 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Luke the evangelist, the physician, became a martyr. This holy man was
one of the number of the seventy-two disciples whom the Holy Gospel mentioned; he
ministered to the Apostles Peter and Paul and he wrote the histories of them. After the
death of Peter and Paul, Luke preached in the country of Rome. And those who
worshipped idols came to an agreement with the Jews, and they stood up before the
Emperor Nero and they cried out concerning Luke the disciple, and they made accusations
against him; and said, “He brings very many men under his teaching by means of his
sorcery”; and the Emperor Nero commanded that they should bring Luke before him. And
when the apostle knew that he was about to depart from this world, he found an old man
who was a fisherman, and he gave him the books and the volumes which were with him,
103

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and he said unto him, “Take good care of these books, for they will be of benefit to thee,
and will make thee to arrive on the road of God.” And when he had come to Nero,
Emperor of Rome, he stood up before him. And the emperor said unto him, “How much
longer wilt thou lead men into error by thy sorcery?” And Saint Luke answered and said
unto him, “I am not a magician, but an Apostle of our Lord Christ, the Son of the Living
God.” And the emperor commanded [his soldiers] to cut off his right hand, saying, “I cut
off this hand which wrote books”; and straightway they cut off his hand. And Saint Luke
said unto him, “Verily we do not fear the death of this world, but behold thou shalt at this
moment see the power of my God Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise!” And the saint
reached out his left hand, and took up in it the right hand, which had been cut off, and
made it to cleave to its proper place, and it remained there firmly and became like unto the
other; then he separated it from the wrist and it remained thus. And those who were there
marveled, and the chief officer, and his wife and very many men believed in our Lord
Christ; and they were in number two hundred and seven and seventy souls. And the
emperor commanded his soldiers to cut off their heads, and the head of Saint Luke the
apostle, and the soldiers cut them off and the saints received crowns of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. And they placed the body of Saint Luke the apostle in a hair
sack. And they cast it into the sea, and by the Will of God the waves of the sea brought it
to an island, and a certain man who was a believer found it, and he gave it honorable
burial. This holy man wrote his Gospel for Theophilus, who was a Gentile, and he also
wrote for him the “Acts of the Apostles.” Salutation to Luke whose tongue was true, and
who wrote the Divine Gospel.
Salutation to the company of martyrs who died with Saint Luke.
Salutation to the old man Silas, who received Saint Luke’s books and preserved them in
purity.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 23
(November 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba Joseph, the fifty-second Archbishop of Alexandria. This man
was the son of one of the elders of the city of Manuf, and he had very many possessions.
When his parents died and left him an orphan a certain God-fearing man brought him up,
and when he arrived at man’s estate he took his goods and gave them to the poor and the
beggars. Then he went up into the desert of Scete, to the monastery of Saint Abba
Macarius, and he became a monk under the direction of a certain holy old man. When
Abba Mark the second was appointed archbishop, and he heard that the natural disposition
and intelligence of this Saint Abba Joseph were good, he sent and had him brought unto
him, and established him in his house. After many days Abba Joseph asked Abba Mark
the archbishop, saying, “Let me depart to the desert of Scete,” and straightway Abba Mark
made him a priest and sent him away to the desert of Scete. And he remained there many
years, until the holy father Abba Simon the archbishop died, and the country of Egypt
104

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
remained without an archbishop for many years. After the death of Abba Jacob, the
bishops, made an agreement with a certain scribe in the king’s house, who had married and
whose wife had died, now he had never been a monk, and the bishops took bribes from
him, and they made an agreement with one-half of the men of the city of Alexandria, to
appoint that scribe archbishop. And all the bishops rose up against him, and they said unto
him, “This scheme which thou hast planned is not good, but bad, for the holy Canon saith
that all those who shall either take or receive bribes in respect of appointments to the
priesthood, are to be excommunicated. And more especially shall it be so in this case, for
this man hath married twice, and he is wholly unsuited for the office of archbishop; and
besides, up to the present none but a virgin hath been appointed to sit on the throne of
Mark the evangelist.” And these men then joined with them in this good counsel, and they
rose up and came into the church, and prayed to God and entreated Him to make clear unto
them who were the best man for this office. And straightway God heard their petition, and
He made them to remember this Abba Joseph, and they sent a letter ordering the monks to
bring him from the desert of Scete. And those who had been sent prayed unto God and
said, “We beseech Thee to reveal the matter unto us clearly; if Thou hast chosen this father
Abba Joseph to be the archbishop, give us the following sign, that is to say, let us find the
door of his cell open.” And when they came to his cell they found the door of his cell
open, and they found Abba Joseph bidding farewell to a certain monk, and he was wishing
to go into his cell and to shut the door. When he saw them he embraced them with a holy
embrace, and received them with joy, and brought them into his house. When they came
into his house they seized him and bound him, saying, “He is worthy, He is worthy, Abba
Joseph is worthy of the archiepiscopate.” And he cried out and wept, and he said unto
them, “I have committed very many sins, far more than any other man”; but they would
not accept this excuse from him, but they took him to the city of Alexandria and appointed
him archbishop. Having taken his seat upon the throne of Mark the apostle, he thought
about the Church exceedingly, and with what remained of his own stipend he bought plots
of ground, which had been dedicated to pious works, and endowed the churches with them.
And he taught the people at all times, and he never neglected any one of them. Now, Satan
was jealous of him, and he schemed schemes and brought sorrow upon him, and the
immediate cause was that the Bishop of the city of Tenes (Tanis), and the Bishop of the
city of Mesr (Cairo), behaved wrongly towards the people and oppressed them in the
matter of dues and afflicted them, and Abba Joseph said unto them, “Forbear and do not
afflict them.” And on several occasions he had entreated them to look upon their flocks
with the eye of mercy, but they would not accept his behests, and they set them aside. And
these holy bishops having afflicted their people [to excess], all the people came to the
Archbishop Abba Joseph, and they all cried out before him, and said unto him, “If thou
wilt not remove these bishops from over us we shall embrace another Faith.” And Abba
Joseph fought very, very hard to make peace between them, but he was not able to do so.
Then he brought all the bishops from all the land of Egypt, and when they were assembled,
he told them how these two bishops had afflicted their people. And the archbishop sent
and had those two bishops brought before him, and he wished to make peace between them
and their people; but they would listen neither to his commands nor to those of his brother
bishops. And straightway the archbishop said unto them before all the bishops, “I am
innocent of your sins,” and the bishops were witnesses against the two bishops that they
had transgressed the command of the Archbishop Abba Joseph. And they all wrote with
their own hands to this effect; “It is meet for these two bishops to be cut off from their
sees” and straightway the archbishop cut them from their sees. And when he had cut them
105

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
off from their sees, these two bishops went to the King of Egypt, and made false
accusations against this father Abba Joseph before him, and the king sent his brother and a
company of soldiers to bring the archbishop to him. When he had come to him the king’s
brother drew his sword and wanted to kill him, and when he was about to smite the
archbishop with the sword, God thrust aside the hand of that nobleman, and his sword
struck a pillar, and broke, and he was furiously angry. And another man drew his dagger
and drove it into the side of the archbishop with all his might, and his apparel and his
girdle were cut through, but the dagger did not enter the flesh of the archbishop. Then that
nobleman knew that the archbishop was a righteous man, and that there was in him divine
grace, which would preserve him from every evil, and from murder. And he brought him
to the king his brother with great honor, and he told him what he had done to the
archbishop, and how he had been smitten twice with the sword and had escaped unhurt.
When the king heard this he marveled, and he was afraid of the archbishop and paid him
honor, and then he asked him questions about the two bishops who had made accusations
against him before him. And the archbishop told him what had happened in the matter of
the bishops, and he proved to him that the accusations, which they had made against him,
were falsehoods. And the king knew that those bishops were liars, and evil men, and
accursed oppressors, and straightway he commanded [his soldiers] to slay them. And the
archbishop said unto him, “Our Lord Christ in the Holy Gospel commanded us to do good
in return for evil. These bishops made false accusations against me, but behold, God hath
established it in thy heart that I am innocent of the false charges which they laid against me
to thee; I therefore beseech thee to have mercy upon them, and to forgive them for God’s
sake.” When the king saw the piety of the archbishop, he marveled exceedingly, and he
paid him honor, and he had mercy upon those two bishops for his sake. And he wrote for
him an authorization and gave it to him, and in it he ordered: “Neither officials nor
bishops shall resist the archbishop, and they shall not disobey his command, and
whatsoever he is pleased to do in his see he shall do, whether it be to remove a man from
his office or to appoint a new one.” And in the days of this father the King of Ethiopia sent
him a letter, saying, “I do homage to the throne of Mark the evangelist, whereon to sit thou
art worthy, and by his grace my kingdom hath waxed strong. I beseech thee to have
compassion upon me and to send unto us as bishop Abba John. There are certain men of
our city who have gone astray from the light of the throne of Saint Mark the evangelist,
and who have set their feet on the road, which is full of thorns, and they have driven out
Abba John our bishop. Because of this great tribulation hath come upon our land and all
our men are dying of the plague, and our beasts and cattle have perished, and God hath
restrained the heavens so that they cannot rain upon our land, and our enemies have risen
up against us and have conquered us, because we have not obeyed the commandments of
God. And now, O holy Abuna, have mercy upon us and upon our folly. Send us our
Bishop John so that he may entreat God, and pray for us, and deliver us from this
tribulation through thy prayer and his own. And I will inform thee, O my father, what hath
been the cause of this. I thy son was blessed by my father Abba John the bishop, and he
bade me farewell as he set me on my way with my soldiers, and he blessed me and then
returned and dwelt in his diocese. And we departed to the war, and we continued to fight
for very many days, and our enemies conquered us, and they destroyed our soldiers, and
we took to flight and returned to our own country, and we missed Abba John our bishop.
And I enquired for him, and they told me that my wife, the queen, had driven him into
exile because certain evil men had counseled her to do so, even as Queen Eudoxia had in
days of old driven John of the Golden Mouth (Chrysostom) into exile, and that they had
106

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
appointed another bishop who was their choice; they have transgressed the command of
the holy Canon, and therefore our country is destroyed. And now have pity upon us and
send Abba John to pray for us.” Now when they drove that bishop out of Ethiopia he went
and dwelt in the monastery wherein he had become a monk, and that was the monastery of
Saint Abba Moses of the desert of Scete. When Abba Joseph the archbishop had read the
letter of the King of Ethiopia, he rejoiced exceedingly because of his confidence, and he
sent quickly to the desert of Scete and brought back Abba John, and he comforted him, and
encouraged him, and sent brave men with him to the country of Ethiopia. As soon as he
arrived, the plague ceased, and rain fell from heaven, and the king rejoiced with very great
joy at his arrival; and this father rebuked the wicked sinners and converted them to the
Orthodox Faith. And he likewise encouraged all Christian people in the right and good
Faith, which they had received from their fathers. And he used to interpret for them
obscure passages in the Holy Scriptures, and declare their meaning unto them, and he
preserved them by his teachings and prayers. And God made manifest through this holy
father Abba Joseph great signs and wonders, and having finished his good and divine fight,
and pleased God, he died in peace, having sat upon the throne of Mark the evangelist
nineteen years. He lived the life of a monk for nine and thirty years, and he had lived ten
years before he adopted the life of a monk; and all the days of his life were eight and sixty
years.
And on this day also Saint Dionysius, Bishop of the city of Corinth, became a martyr in the
days of Diocletian and Maximianus, the wicked emperors. They condemned this holy man
to be tortured very severely, and when they were tired of torturing him they cut off his
head with a sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens.
Salutation to Archbishop Joseph of the city of Manuf, unto whom was given the
knowledge of Letters. Salutation to Dionysius the Bishop of Corinth whose head was cut
off.
And on this day also [are commemorated] the deaths of Tenkeyake (or Tayanke), and
Theodosius, the Laos (Talawos), Taxis, and Josab (or Joseph), and the strife of Andrew,
the martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 24
(November 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the fighter Abba Ablarius (Hilarius?) the monk and anchorite. This holy
man was a native of the city of Gaza, and his parents were pagans, and they taught him all
the various kinds of learning of the Greeks, and their philosophy, and he was very far
superior in knowledge to many of his companions, and wisdom had a dwelling place in his
soul. And he wished to make himself very strong in the learning of foreign peoples, but
there was no one in his city who could teach him that learning, and who could fulfill for
him all that he desired. And he rose up and went to the city of Alexandria, and he went
107

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
into the place where all the doctors sat, and he learned from them many kinds of learning.
And a divine zeal moved within him to learn the doctrine of the Church, and he enquired
for the Books of the Church, and certain men gave them to him, and he read them and
understood them. And Abba Iskander, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, revealed and
explained to him the meaning of what was obscure in the Books, and he made him to
understand the belief on our Lord Jesus Christ. And Iskander baptized him with Christian
baptism, and he fought a great fight, and he became a monk and devoted himself diligently
to the path of the monastic life. Then he went to Saint Abba Anthony, and he dwelt with
him for many days, learning from him the path of righteousness. When he heard that his
parents according to the flesh were dead, he went to his city, and took the goods, which his
parents had left him, and gave them to the poor and needy, and to the women who were
with child. Then he entered one of the monasteries in the country of Syria, and he fought a
great fight, and he devoted himself strenuously to fasting, and prayer, and bowings, and
vigils, and he used to fast for six days and six nights at a time, and he used to feed himself
on the grass of the desert. And his heart shone brightly, and God gave him the gift of
prophecy and of working signs and wonders. After this he dwelt in that same monastery
for many years, and it was in that monastery that Epiphanius became a monk. And the
abbot received this Saint Ablarius (Hilarius?) and he taught him the rule of the ascetic life
and the Law of the Church, and he prophesied of him that he would become the Bishop of
Cyprus, which came to pass even as he had prophesied. Now the days of this father were
eighty years; ten years he lived in the house of his father, and seven years in the city of
Alexandria, and for three and sixty years he led the life of a monk and fought a great fight.
And he pleased God and died at a good old age. And Saint John of the Golden Mouth
(Chrysostom) praised this holy man, and Saint Basil in his writings also praised him.
Salutation to Ablarius (Hilarius?) who drank seawater and ate grass.
Salutation to Sabla Mariyam, who was famed for her fasting and self-abnegation.
And on this day also Saint Paul and his companion [Longinus], and the holy woman Zaina
became martyrs. Salutation to Paul, Longinus, and Zaina.
And on this day also are commemorated Eusia (Ausia), and Constantine.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 25
(November 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Abba Bula, who was surnamed ‘Abib. The name of the father of this holy
man was Abraham, and that of his mother was Harik, and they were natives of the country
of Rome, and came from the borders of Lupi; and since there was a persecution in the days
of the Emperor Maximianus they continued to fly from city to city. As they lacked a son
they entreated God, with fasting and prayer, to give them a son. And the angel of the Lord
appeared unto them in a dream, and gave them a vine cluster which was full of grapes, and
when the blessed woman conceived, a large tree which was near their house blossomed,
and on the leaves thereof were written in the language of Rome the following words:
108

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
“Bula servant of God, and the saint of the God of Jacob, Who dwelleth in Zion.” And
when the child was born they left him for some time without making him a Christian.
Then our Lady Mariyam appeared unto the Archbishop of Rome, and commanded him to
go to the house of Abraham and baptize the child; and when he arrived there he made him
a Christian and called his name “Bula.” When the father and the mother of the child heard
[this] they marveled because he had called the child by that name without their having told
him the name. When the archbishop had prayed, bread for the Offering and a cup of wine
came down from heaven, and he consecrated them and administered unto them the Holy
Mysteries. When the boy was one year old he spoke plainly and said, “One is the Holy
Father, One is the Holy Son, One is the Holy Ghost.” After a little [time] his father and his
mother died, on the sixteenth day of the month of Hedar (Nov-Dec). When the boy was
ten years of age there arrived a wicked governor who ordered [the people] to worship idols,
and when Abba Bula heard about it, he went to the governor and cursed his filthy idols.
When the governor saw the small stature of the boy he marveled greatly. And he
commanded [his soldiers] to drive nails into him, and to scrape his body, and to strip off
his skin, and to saw off his hands and his feet, and to beat his back with whips, and to cast
him on the wheel among the sharp knives and spikes, and to drag him along the road of the
city; [and they did so]. And Saint Michael came and saved him, and healed him. Then
Bula went to another wicked governor and reviled him, and the governor was wroth with
him and cut off his head with the sword, and he was crowned on the eighteenth day of the
month of Miyazya (April-May). And Saint Michael came down from heaven and raised
him up unharmed, and he took him into the desert, and he arrayed him in the garb of the
monk, and put upon him a mark in appearance like the sign of the Cross, and he said unto
him, “God hath commanded thee to be a companion of the Saints.” And Abba Bula went
up into a dry (i.e., withered) tree, and he dwelt therein fighting incessantly, and whenever
he remembered the Crucifixion of our Lord Jesus Christ and His Passion, he always cast
himself down from the top of the tree. One day having cast himself down Satan was
strong to kill him, and he died, but our Redeemer came straightway and raised him up, and
he said unto him, “Thy name shall not be ‘Bula’ only, but ‘ ‘Abibha,’ for thou shalt
become many fathers.” And Bula loved Christ more and more, and he was always beating
his face, and cutting his flesh with knives, every member of him, and he beat his back with
seven hundred stripes; through these acts he died three times and our Redeemer raised him
up again. And on each occasion He showed him how he had been born of a virgin, and on
other days He showed him how he was seized by the Jews and His Passion. And for this
reason Bula lived without eating and without drinking for two and forty years, and he
never lay on his side for six and sixty years. And he also kept his head fixed for twelve
years and six months, until his brains perished. One day when he saw the Passion of our
Lord, he place a sword upright before him and then fell upon it and died. And our Lady
Mariyam came with angels to the place where his body was, and she said unto him, “Peace
be unto thee, O my beloved”; and his body spoke and said unto her, “Peace be unto thee, O
Queen of the world.” And she laid her hands upon his body and healed him. And when
his days were ended, and it was time for him to depart from this world, our Lord Jesus
Christ appeared unto him having in His hands shining crowns set with gems of various
kinds, and shining raiment. And He said unto him, “Come unto Me, O My beloved ‘Abib,
so that thou mayest enjoy never-ending pleasure. I swear unto thee by Myself that
whosoever calleth upon thy name I will forgive him his sins. And whosoever
commemorates thee, or show mercy on the poor, or clothes the naked, or feedeth the
hungry, or gives drink to the thirsty man, or buildeth a shrine for thee, or writes the story of
109

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
thy strife, or readeth it or heareth it, I will forgive his sins even to the tenth generation.”
Having said this He kissed his mouth, and bearing him upon His breast carried him up into
the air. And when he heard the praise of the angels, his soul tore itself away from his
body, and entered the heavenly Jerusalem. Salutation to ‘Abib.
Salutation to the twelve handmaidens, and to the three and forty men, and to the three
hundred and sixty women, who under the influence of ‘Abib became martyrs.
And on this day also died Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?), who was like the angels. The name of
the father of this holy man Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?) was ‘Amone, and he was a native of the
city of Akhmim; the name of his mother was Musya. And both of them were righteous
before God, and they walked in His way; and they were very charitable towards pilgrims
and strangers. Now they had no son at all. And his mother Musya saw a vision one night,
and she saw in it a shining man who had with him a tree, and he planted the tree in her
house, and it took root and blossomed and bore fruit. And the shining being said unto her,
“Whosoever shall eat of this tree shall live for ever.” And the mother of the holy man took
some of the fruit thereof and ate it, and it was sweet in her mouth, and she said in her heart,
“Shall I, I wonder, have fruit.” When she awoke from her sleep she told her husband what
she had seen. And he told her that he had seen in his vision what his wife had seen in her
vision, and they praised God many times. And they added to their works of righteousness
and to their strivings, and they fasted for two days at a time and their food was bread and
salt. When the mother of the holy man Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?) conceived, she prayed
many prayers and vanquished enemies. And every night she prostrated herself to the
ground one thousand times, and every day five hundred times for a period of nine months,
until she brought forth her son; and she called him “ ‘Ebloy (Apollo?).” After this she
added to her works of goodness and righteousness. When Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?) arrived
at man’s estate he wished to assume the garb of the monk, and he continued to feel this
wish until he found the mans of gratifying it. Now he had a friend whose name was ‘Abib,
and taking him with him they went forth by night, and they departed and became monks in
one of the monasteries of Upper Egypt; and they devoted themselves to the ascetic life and
fought strenuously. After a few days ‘Abib died, on the twenty-fifth day of the month
Tekemt (Oct-Nov). Thereupon Saint Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?) departed to the monastery of
Ablug, and many men were gathered together [there], and he taught them the fear of God
and right worship. And on the day of the death of Abba ‘Abib, whilst they were
performing the service of commemoration, Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?) said unto them, “O
brethren, whosoever shall pray this day in the name of Abba ‘Abib God will forgive him
his sin, even as Christ promised him with this promise, in the following words: ‘O My
chosen one ‘Abib, whosoever shall pray one prayer on the day of thy commemoration
(now Saint ‘Abib had said to God, Forgive me all my sin), I will forgive him his sin for thy
name’s sake.’ “ And it came to pass in that hour that one of the monks died, and whilst
they were standing and were burying him, one of the brethren who were monks felt doubts
about what Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?) said. And straightway that dead man rose up, and he
began to speak and to say unto them, “Why do ye doubt the words of Abba ‘Ebloy
(Apollo?)? God did covenant this covenant with our father Abba ‘Abib on the day of his
commemoration”; when the dead man had said these words he turned and lay down again.
And the brethren, the monks, marveled and praised God. Now Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?)
lived very many years, and he built many monasteries, and had many children; and in his
days lived Abba Macarius the Great. When Abba Macarius heard the report of him he
rejoiced therein exceedingly, and he wrote to him letters comforting him and his sons, the
110

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
monks, and encouraging him to continue in the work, which was well pleasing to God.
Now whilst Abba Macarius was writing those letters in the desert of Scete, Abba ‘Ebloy
(Apollo?), being in Upper Egypt, knew by the Holy Spirit that he was doing so. And he
said unto the monks who were round about him, speaking unto them with the voice of
God, “Be silent, O my brethren, for behold Abba Macarius is writing to us a letter of
encouragement.” Having spoken these words in this manner, behold, straightway a certain
monk came having with him the letter of Abba Macarius. And the monks went out and
they received him with joy, and he read the letter before all the monks with joy and they
rejoiced with a great joy. This holy man Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?) went to the holy father
Abba Ammonius, and he saw that holy woman, whose name was Yawahit, dwelling with
him. And Christ having wished to give him rest from the labor of this world, he died
straightway in peace on the fifth day of the month of Yakatit (Feb-Mar). Now we have
written the history of Abba ‘Ebloy (Apollo?) side by side with that of his friend Abba
‘Abib.
And on this day also took place the consecration of the church of Saint Julius the martyr,
of the city of ‘Akpahos (Acfaha). Now the saint became a martyr in the city of Tewa,
according to what is written in the account of his strife. And this took place after the
destruction of Diocletian the infidel, when Constantine was reigning, and a few days
before he was baptized with Christian baptism. And when he had been baptized the horn
of the Christian kingdom was exalted, and churches were built in the names of the holy
martyrs whom the infidel emperors had slain. When the Emperor Constantine heard the
report of this holy man Julius, and how God had raised him up and preserved him so that
he might care for the bodies of the holy martyrs, both him and his servants, and carry their
bodies and bury them, and write the history of their strifes, and how he became a martyr
afterwards, he praised [God] for this holy man, for his fight was good. And the emperor
sent very much money to Egypt, and he commanded [the people] to build a fine church in
his honor, and to carry his body thither and to lay it therein; and they built a fine church in
his honor even as the emperor commanded, and they translated the body of Saint Julius
and laid it therein. And the Archbishop of Alexandria and his bishops consecrated it, and
celebrated a festival even as do we this day. And many great signs and wonders were
wrought by the body of Saint Julius. Salutation to the consecration of thy church, O Julius.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba ‘Abel and Dalila (Delilah), the virgin.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 26
(November 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.

On this day died Saint Timon, apostle and martyr. Out Lord chose this disciple and he was
of the number of the Seventy-two disciples whom He chose and made known and sent
forth; and He gave them power to heal the sick and to cast out Satan. And this holy man
received the heavenly gift and the divine grace, and with it he healed the sick, and the
111

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Satan submitted unto him; and he ministered unto our Lord Jesus Christ as long as He
dwelt in the body upon earth. After our Lord had ascended into heaven this holy man
ministered unto the apostles continually, and until the gift of the Holy Spirit descended
upon him and upon them on the day of the feast of Pentecost. After this the apostles
elected him into the number of the seventy deacons whom they appointed; and the Book is
a witness concerning them that they were filled with the Holy Spirit and wisdom. After he
had served the office of deacon for a few days, the apostles appointed him a priest, and
then they laid hands upon him and appointed him Bishop in the city of Besra of the West,
of the country of Belka. And he preached the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ therein, and
he baptized very many Greeks and Jews. When the governor of the city heard this he
seized Saint Timon, and tortured him severely and burnt him in the fire, and he received
the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Timon.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint James, the brother of our Lord, and Huras
the martyr.
And on this day also died Philip and Sawgenas.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 27
(November 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and blessed father Abba Macarius, Bishop of the city of Kaw. In
this holy man were fulfilled the words of David the prophet, saying, “Blessed is the man
who hath not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, who hath not stood in the way of
sinners, and who hath not sat in the seat of the scoffers, but whose pleasure is in the Law of
God, and in that Law he doth meditate (or speak) day and night” (Psalm I). This holy man
kept the commandment of God, and he traded with [his] talent and gained profit thereby.
How many were the signs and great wonders, which God wrought by the hands of this holy
man! Concerning him it is said that when he was in the city of Kaw, every time he took
his seat upon the throne to teach the people he would weep continuously. And one of his
disciples whom he loved exceedingly adjured him, saying, “Why dost thou weep
continuously, my father?” And because of his disciple’s adjuration he answered and said,
“I weep when I see the sins of the people and the evil of their works; even as oil is seen
upon glass.” And on another occasion he saw our Lord Christ sitting upon the altar, and
the angels bringing unto Him the works of each and every man. And he heard a voice,
which said, “Bishop, why dost thou keep thyself invisible to the people? Why dost thou
not rebuke them and teach them?” And the bishop said, “My Lord, they will not accept my
words.” And He said unto him, “It is meet for a bishop to admonish the people and to
teach them; and if they will not receive his words then their blood be upon their own
heads.” For this reason the holy man was always weeping. Then [this father] was
summoned to go with Saint Abba Dioscorus to the Council, which had been assembled by
the Emperor Marcianus. And when he arrived at the royal palace the guard would not
allow him to enter because of his mean attire, and the soldiers told Abba Dioscorus, who
112

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
said unto them, “Bring him in, for he is a bishop.” When he had gone in and had heard
their words concerning our Lord in their evil faith, how they separated His Godhead and
assigned to Him Two Natures, this holy man became wroth with them, and he cursed the
Emperor Marcianus in the Council. And he spoke to the emperor fearlessly, for he had
delivered himself over to death for the True Faith; and [the emperor] exiled him and
Dioscorus to the island of Gagra. And from this place Dioscorus sent him with a certain
believing man to the city of Alexandria, and he prophesied to him, saying, “Needs must
that thou shalt receive the crown of martyrdom.” When Saint Abba Macarius had arrived
in the city of Alexandria, there reached him at this time a letter from the infidel Emperor
Marcianus, and with it was a roll containing a copy of the wicked creed, which assigned to
Christ Two Natures. Now Marcianus, the infidel emperor, had commanded his envoy and
said unto him, “He who shall first write [his name] on this roll, and doth believe our belief,
make him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria.” And there was in the city of Alexandria
a certain man, an infidel, a high priest, whose name was ‘Abrotari, and he took that filthy
roll and wished to write [his name] first on it. And Saint Abba Macarius said unto
‘Abrotari, “Remember the word which Abba Dioscorus spoke unto thee when he went
from the city of Alexandria, saying, ‘Thou shalt have dominion over the Church after
me’”; and ‘Abrotari remembered that word and did not wish to write [his name] on that
filthy roll. And the envoy of the emperor made known to him that Bishop Abba Macarius
did not believe in the faith of the Emperor Marcianus, and that he would not write [his
name] on that filthy roll. When the emperor heard this, he rose up in wrath, and he sent
and had Saint Abba Macarius beaten on his members secretly, and straightway Abba
Macarius died, and received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven. And
believers carried away the saint’s body, and they placed it with the bodies of Saint John the
Baptist and Elisa the prophet. Now Saint Abba Macarius had seen vision wherein these
saints, John and Elisa, had said unto him, “Thy body shall be with ours.” And the body of
Saint Abba Macarius was with the bodies of Abba Macarius the Great, and Abba Macarius
the Alexandrian in the monastery of Scete. And this father Macarius went to Christ Whom
he loved, and crowned himself with the crown of endurance. Many salutations to
Macarius, who hated false belief. When the wife of the governor laid her hand on the face
of this holy man she was cleansed of her leprosy and made whole.
On this day also are commemorated Paul of the Cell, and Julianus and his companions who
became martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 28
(November 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the great saints Marcianus and Mercurius became martyrs. These holy men
were disciples of Saint Paul the martyr, Archbishop of the city of Constantine. When the
Emperor Constantine, the son of Constantine the Great, reigned, the belief of the infidel
Arius waxed strong and he made himself the enemy of Abba Paul, Archbishop of the city
of Constantine, and he banished him to the country of Armenia, and strangled him and
113

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
killed him there. And saints Marcianus and Mercurius wrote jointly on the day of the
death of Saint Paul, and cursed the emperor, and they said of him that he believed the faith
of Arius the infidel, and they anathematized Arius and the emperor. And a certain wicked
man went and made accusations against them to the emperor, and said unto him, “They
have cursed thee and they have cursed Arius.” Now the emperor was dwelling in a certain
village, and he sent and had the saints brought to him, and he commanded [his soldiers] to
slay them with the sword, and they slew them and buried them where they had been slain,
and their bodies remained in that place until the days of John of the Golden Mouth
(Chrysostom). And when John heard the history of them he sent and brought their
honorable bodies into the city of Constantine; and he built a beautiful church for them, and
he translated their bodies and laid them in it, and the people made a great feast as at this
day. Salutation to Marcianus and Mercurius, disciples of Paul the archbishop.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Maksu, and Macarius, and the death of
Japheth the son of Noah, whom his father blessed, saying, “God shall make broad the land
of Japheth.”
And on this day also died Saint Abba Yam’ata, who was one of the Nine Saints. Salutation
to Yam’ata, whose body was buried in a rock on the top of a mountain.
Salutation to Abraham, who separated himself from the Gentiles, and to Jacob, and to
Isaac. [This paragraph is not in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 29
(November 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the Birth of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ,
by the Lady of us all, the holy two-fold virgin Mary, the God-bearer, for ever and ever,
Amen. Salutation to Thy birth O Flower Who blossomed without water.
And on this day also the great Saint Demetrius became a martyr. This holy man lived in
the days of Maximianus the infidel, and he was a native of the city of Thessalonica; he was
a Christian, and he learned various kinds of learning, but he held in more esteem than all of
them the doctrine of the Church, the Holy Orthodox Faith. And he taught and preached
continually in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he converted many pagans, and
brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And certain men made accusations
against Saint Demetrius to the infidel emperor, who commanded [his soldiers] to bring him
to him. And there came to the place where the emperor was a man who was strong in his
body, and thick in his bones, and who vanquished every man by his strength, and he was a
skilled fighting man and no one was able to vanquish him. And the emperor loved this
man exceedingly, and boasted of his superiority over every other man, and said, “I will
give much money to the man who shall vanquish him”; but there was no man who was
able to do so. At that moment there rose up from among those who were there a certain
man, a Christian, whose name was Bastius, and he came to Saint Demetrius and asked him
114

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to pray for him, and to make the sign of the Cross with his hand on his body. And Saint
Demetrius prayed over him, and he made upon the body of that man the sign of the Cross,
which makes invincible him that believed thereon. And that man went to the emperor and
asked him to let him fight with that fighter of whom the emperor boasted. And the
emperor commanded that Bastius should fight with him, and he thought that the mighty
man would vanquish him just as he had vanquished every other man. When Bastius joined
in fight with that mighty man, he vanquished him and threw him on the ground, and the
emperor was very sorry for this and was ashamed, and he marveled, and said, “By what
means did Bastius vanquish that mighty man?” And the emperor asked his soldiers
concerning this, and they told him that the holy man Demetrius had prayed over him and
had made the sign of the Cross upon his body. When the emperor heard this he was
exceedingly wroth with Saint Demetrius, and he commanded his soldiers to beat him until
he offered incense to the gods, and worshipped them, and they did as he commanded. And
when Demetrius would not obey his command the emperor commanded the soldiers to
thrust at him with spears until he died. And the soldiers told Demetrius about this
command, and they thought that he would deny and abandon the Faith of Christ, and
worship idols. And Saint Demetrius said unto them, “Do whatsoever ye please, for I will
neither offer incense to nor worship the filthy gods; I will worship only our Lord [Jesus
Christ], the Son of the Living God, Who is God in truth.” And straightway the soldiers
drove spears into him until he died, and he delivered up his pure soul into the hands of
Christ. And when they threw out the body of the saint certain believing Christians took it
and laid it in a sarcophagus in their house, and it remained hidden among them until the
end of the days of persecution. And God revealed it to the Christians, who brought out his
body, which was with them, and they built a great church for him in the city of
Thessalonica, and they laid the body of the saint therein, and to this day it works great
signs and miracles. And each day there distills from it oil and unguent having an
exceedingly sweet odor, and when those who are sick anoint themselves therewith in firm
faith they become healed, especially on the day of his commemoration. On that day he
distills the unguent in a larger quantity than on any other day, and it drips from the walls of
the church and the pillars thereof, and the people collect it and pour it into their scent
bottles. And this sign shall continue, and shall be found to exist until the end of the world;
now the priests and the righteous men who have seen this wonderful thing testify
concerning [the truth thereof]. Salutation to Demetrius who was stabbed to death with
spears.
Salutation to Sakter the martyr, the friend of Mar Demetrius (?), and salutation to his
servant who was cut to pieces after him.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TEKEMT 30
(November 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, the fighter who prayed always, Abraham the anchorite.
This holy man was a native of the city of Manuf, and his parents feared God, and served
115

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Christ, and they were exceedingly rich in the possessions of this world. When he had
grown to man’s estate, this holy man wished to put on the garb of the ascetic life. And he
departed to the city of Akhmim in Upper Egypt, and he came to the saint and great man
Abba Pachomius, who arrayed him in the garb of the monk, and he subjected his body to
strenuous work and continuous ascetic practices, and he fought incessantly and served
God. And he dwelt with Abba Pachomius in his own company for three and twenty years,
and then Saint Abraham asked Abba Pachomius to allow him to dwell by himself in a cell
(or cave); and Abba Pachomius having commanded, Abraham departed and went into a
cell, and he made with his own hands curved hooks wherewith men caught fish. And our
Lord Jesus Christ brought unto him a certain layman who used to take what his hands
made and go and buy for him dried beans, which he would carry to him, and what was left
of the payment for his handiwork he gave to the poor and needy. The food of this holy
man Abraham each day in the evening was a handful of beans soaked in water with a little
salt thrown upon them; and he dwelt in this cell and lived this life or self-abnegation for
thirteen years. And the apparel, which he used to put on, was that in which he went forth
from the monastery, and it was worn out in these days, for he had had it a very long time,
and he covered his body with rags. After [each] two or three years he used to go up to the
brethren the monks, and partake of the Holy Mysteries and then return to his cell. At the
beginning of his dwelling in the cell the devils used to come to him and terrify him, and
make him hear voices, and they made themselves like [beings of] the underworld; and
Abraham used to drive them away just as a man drives away dogs. When his death drew
nigh he sent that layman to the monastery of Saint Abba Pachomius, and he summoned
Saint Theodore his disciple, and when he came to him [he bowed down] at his feet, and he
embraced him and asked him to remember him and to pray over him. Then Saint Abraham
rose up and prayed with Saint Theodore and he lay down with his face to the east, and he
delivered up his soul into the hand of God. And Saint Theodore sent to the monastery, and
the monks came and carried his body thereto, and they all prayed over him and were
blessed by him, and they laid him with the bodies of the saints. Salutation to Abraham
who dressed in rags and ate beans soaked in water.
And on this day also are commemorated Falibun, and Kayna, and the appearance of the
head of John the Baptist, and Martes, and Mars, and Isaac [the king]. Salutation to Isaac
the King.
Here ends the blessed month of Tekemt by the good pleasure of God Most High, and by
the Will of His Son Jesus Christ, and by the help of our holy Lady, the two-fold Virgin,
Mary, the God-bearer. May the blessing of her prayers and the gift of her help, and the
mercy of her beloved Son be with our King John, and with the Queen Sabla Wangel, and
with his scribe Walda Haymanot, and may God have mercy upon us in the kingdom of the
heavens, with all the martyrs, forever and ever! Amen and Amen.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

116

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE THIRD MONTH
HEDAR 01
(November 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
Month of Hedar the blessed. In this month the length of the [first] day is ten hours, and
then it diminishes.
On this day the fighters and saints Maximus, and Manfius, and Victorius, and Philip [of
Africa] became martyrs. These holy fighters were natives of the country of Phrygia, and
they were brethren in the Holy Spirit though not according to the flesh, and they gathered
together and became companions for the sake of the love of Christ. And in the days of
Decius, the infidel emperor, the Seven Children fled and hid themselves in a cave in the
top of a mountain. And when these fighters [and] martyrs Maximus and his companions
saw the infidel emperor denying Christ, and torturing the Christians, they rose up and
gathered themselves together, and they agreed together with one consent that they would
declare publicly their faith. And they drew nigh unto that infidel emperor, and they cried
out, saying, “We are Christians openly, and we believe on Christ, the Son of the Living
God, and we bow down before Him and we serve Him.” When that infidel heard these
words he was wroth with them, and he commanded [the soldiers] to beat them and they
beat them very severely for a long time with whips made of leather. And they beat them
again with iron rods, which had been made red-hot in the fire, and then they rubbed their
wounds with bits of rag made of hair, which had been soaked in vinegar and salt. When
they would not obey his commends, and were not afraid of his tortures, and would not turn
from their good counsel, the emperor waxed exceedingly wroth, and he commanded the
soldiers to torture them very severely, and [the soldiers] did unto them even as he
commanded. And when those who were there saw the patient endurance of the holy
martyrs, many of them believed on our Lord Jesus Christ. Then straightway the emperor
commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads, and to hack each of them in twain with a
single blow of their swords, and thereupon they all received crowns of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Maximus and his brethren.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 02
(November 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Abba Sanitius, the sixty-third Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This
father used to teach the people, and he sat for fifteen years and died in peace.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Peter, the twenty-seventh Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria, who was appointed after Saint Timothy. After God had chosen this
117

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
holy father for the office of archbishop, and he had taken his seat upon the Apostolic
Throne, Akkaeus (Akakios), Archbishop of the city of Constantine, wrote to him a letter
wherein he spoke and confessed the Holy Trinity, One God, according to the Faith of
Saints Cyril and Dioscurus, and he also spoke clearly in it, saying, “It is not right to
separate His Divine Nature from His Incarnation, and after their union the benefit of the
union must not be cut off.” And Abba Peter wrote an answer to his letter wherein he
accepted [what he had said] concerning the True Faith, and he sent the letter to him with
three learned bishops. When they came to the Archbishop of the city of Constantine he
accepted those bishops and the letter, which they had with them, and he associated them
with him in the consecration of the Offering, and in the Offering; and he read the letter
before the people who believed his word. Then Akkaeus (Akakios) wrote a second letter
and sent it to Abba Peter wherein were explanations of many passages from the Holy
Scriptures; and Abba Peter assembled the bishops who were under his authority, and he
read that letter before them, and rejoiced exceedingly, and they admired the words and the
explanations therein, and they believed in their participation with him in the True Faith.
And there came upon this father great tribulation, which was caused, by the Jews, and evil
men, and pagans, because of the Faith, and they drove him from his archiepiscopal throne;
but after a few days he returned to the throne of his office. And he used to teach his flock
continually, and strengthen them in the True Faith. When he was far away from them in
exile he used to teach them to be strong by his letters, and when he was with them he used
to teach them by his words; and he sat upon his throne for ten years, and died in peace.
Salutation to the blessed Sanitius and to his great companion.
And on this day also are commemorated Satenwa (Setenna), the prophetess of Alexandria,
and Saint Anastasia, and Abba Libanos.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 03
(November 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great Saint Cyriacus. This holy man was born in the city of Corinth,
and his parents were Orthodox Christians, and they taught him the doctrine of the
Orthodox Church. They brought him to Abba Peter, Bishop of the city of Corinth, and
they prayed over him and appointed him a reader; now he was the son of this father’s
brother. And he used to read the Scriptures continually, and enquire into the meaning of
phrases, and ordinances of the Law of the Church, and he was superior to many in his
learning and wisdom. And the bishop commanded him not to abandon the reading of the
Scriptures, and Cyriacus used to read continually to the people in church and in the
bishop’s house; and the bishop rejoiced in his reading of the Scriptures. When the days of
Cyriacus were eighteen years, his parents asked him to take unto himself a wife, but he did
not want to do this. After this he begged his parents to allow him to depart to a monastery,
and they permitted him, and he was always going to the monasteries and returning to his
parents. And having visited the monasteries very often [at length he wished] to assume to
118

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
holy garb of the monk. And he departed to holy Jerusalem, and he visited Saint Abba
Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, and he told him his mind in respect of the life of the monk.
And Cyril said unto him, “Thou hast wrought a good work, and thou hast loved [it]”; and
he prophesied of him that he would become a great father, and that he would fight a great
fight, and that the souls of many would shine through him. And Abba Cyril the bishop
blessed him and sent him away to the honorable father Abba Romanus, father of the monks
of Palestine. And this father accepted him, and rejoiced in him, and he arrayed him in the
garb of the monk, and he gave him one of the old men of that monastery to admonish him,
and to teach him the Rule of the monks, and to make him to know the artifices and crafts
of Satan. And this saint gave himself wholly to fasting, and prayer, and bowings to the
ground, and vigils, and severe labors both by night and by day, in patient endurance, and
the deepest abasement, and humility. And God bestowed upon him the gift of healing, and
he used to heal all the sick people who came unto him; and the report of him, and of his
virtues and of his holiness was noised everywhere. When the holy father Abba Cyril,
Bishop of Jerusalem, went to the holy Council of One Hundred and Fifty Bishops who
were gathered together in the city of Constantine because of Macedonius, the enemy of the
Holy Ghost, he took this holy man with him. And Cyriacus opposed the arguments of
Macedonius, the infidel, and he vanquished him by the word (or voice) of the Holy Spirit,
which dwelt in him. And having grown old and attained to a good age, and pleased God,
he died in peace; and after his death God made manifest great signs and miracles through
his body, one of which was the following. Now his body hath remained in one of the
monasteries of the city of Jerusalem from the time of his death until the present day, and it
hath not suffered any corruption. All those who go to the city of Jerusalem and look upon
his body, think that he died only a few days ago, whereas he has been dead for a period of
six hundred years. Now, he lived in the days of Theodosius the Great, and father of
Arcadius and Honorius. Salutation to Cyriacus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 04
(November 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saints Epimachus and Azarianus became martyrs. These men were from
Rome, and certain men accused them before the governor who had been appointed by
Maximianus of being believers in Christ. When they had come before him he questioned
them about their Faith, and they confessed that they were Christians, and then they abused
the governor because he had forsaken the God Who created the heavens and the earth and
all that therein is, and because he worshipped idols which were the work of men’s hands,
and which could neither see nor hear, and wherein dwelt Satan and led men astray. And
the governor marveled at their audacity and commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads,
and [the saints] received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven. Salutation to
Epimachus and to Azarianus.
And on this day also James and John, Bishops of the country of Persia, became martyrs by
the hand of Sapor, the son of Hermaz (Hormizd) the King of Persia. The king ordered
119

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them to worship the sun and the moon and the fire, and to offer sacrifice to them, and when
they would not obey his order, he commanded the soldiers to torture them severely, and
they did so. And whilst [the saints] were undergoing the torture, they were teaching the
multitude, and strengthening them in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. When the king
saw the boldness of their hearts, and their patience under the torture, and that they would
not turn from their Faith, and would not cease from the teaching of the people, he
commanded the soldiers to cast them into the fire, and they did so. And having delivered
up their souls into the hand of our Lord Jesus Christ they received crowns of martyrdom
with all the saints. Salutation to James and John, Bishops of the country of Persia.
And on this day also Saint Thomas, Bishop of the city of Damascus, became a martyr by
the hand of an Arab king who was a Muslim. When the Muslims were reigning in the
country of Syria and in the country of Egypt, this holy man held a debate with one of their
learned men, and he vanquished him, and forced him and compelled him [to admit] that
our Lord Christ was God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, and of all that therein
is. The Muslim having been worsted in argument went to the governor, his fellowcountryman, and made an accusation to him against Thomas, saying, “This Christian hath
cursed our religion.” And the governor had this holy man brought, and he asked him,
saying, “Is it true that thou hast cursed our religion even as this man says of thee?” And
the holy man said unto him, “No curse hath ever gone forth from my mouth, but I have
forced him [to admit] that Christ is God in truth, and that after the Law of Christ there
cometh no other Law.” And the governor was wroth with him, and he commanded the
soldiers to cut off the head of the holy man with the sword; and they cut off his holy head,
and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to
Thomas, the companion of Zachariah the teacher, Bishop of Damascus.
And on this day also is commemorated the great father Zachariah.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba ‘Abaydo (Abaidus) the perfect monk, who
rejected the life of this world, and Abba John his disciple, and a company of martyrs, and
Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria. Salutation to ‘Abaydo (Abaidus) and to John.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 05
(November 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day appeared the head of Saint Longinus, master of the spear, who pierced the side
of our Lord Jesus Christ, when He was hanging on the wood of the Cross. Now the
Emperor Tiberius Caesar sent [soldiers] to the country of Cappadocia, and they cut off the
head of Saint Longinus on the twenty-third day of the month Hamle (July-Aug.). And the
head of the holy man and his body were cast out on the ground, and the soldier who had
come from the emperor to cut off his head took it and carried the head away with him to
Jerusalem and gave it to Pilate the Pontinian. And Pilate the governor showed the head to
the Jews, who rejoiced and were glad at his death. And Pilate commanded his soldiers to
bury the head of the holy man in a certain hill, which was outside the city of Jerusalem,
120

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and they went and buried the head there. And after many days there [came] a certain
woman from the country of Cappadocia, and she had become a believer through Saint
Longinus when he preached in the country of Cappadocia; and when they cut off his head
with a sword she was standing by looking on and weeping. Now by the Will of God the
eyes of the woman became blind, and she took her son and departed to Jerusalem so that
she might be blessed [through visiting] the holy places, and to pray and prostrate herself to
the ground in them and at the tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ, that peradventure her eyes
might be opened. When she came to Jerusalem her son died, and her sorrow was increased
by the death of her son, and by her blindness, and by the impossibility of her returning to
her native country. And she wept bitterly, and as she was weeping she fell asleep in her
sorrow, and in her sleep she saw Saint Longinus, and with him was her son who was dead,
and he said unto her, “Go to such and such a place and take my head from there.” When
she awoke from her sleep she enquired concerning that place, and certain men brought her
to it, and when she dug there a sweet odor, which was exceedingly fragrant, rose up to her.
When she came to the place where the head of the saint was a great light was revealed to
her, and straightway her eyes were opened and she saw clearly, and she praised God. And
she removed the head of the saint, and laid scented unguent upon it, and she placed it by
the body of her son. And she departed to her own country glorifying God and praising
Saint Longinus. Salutation to Longinus who was crowned in Rome.
And on this day also are commemorated Timothy the martyr; and the translation of the
body of Saint Theodore the martyr, a captain of soldiers of the city of Setb, in the province
of Asyut in Upper Egypt; and the dedication of a church to him wherein great signs and
wonders took place through his body; and Abba Yohanni. Salutation to Timothy the
martyr. Salutation to Yohanni, who was a companion of those who traveled to the country
of the healthy ones. Salutation to the translation of thy body, O Theodore, who when God
wished to destroy the earth with a flood, didst command the sea, and its waters withdrew.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 06
(November 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Felix, Archbishop of the city of Rome. The parents of this
holy man were Christians, and they taught him all the doctrine of the Church, and
Anastasius, Archbishop of the city of Rome, made him a deacon. When Justus was
appointed Archbishop of the city of Rome, he perceived the intelligence and good
disposition of this man, and his fair righteousness, and he made him a priest. When
Dionysius, Archbishop of the city of Rome, died now he lived in the days of Theonasius,
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, they chose Saint Felix to be Archbishop of the city
of Rome, and by the Will of God he was appointed, and he guarded and protected the flock
of Christ well. After the death of Tures (sic) Caesar, Theodore Caesar reigned, and he
made those who believed in Christ to suffer great tribulation, and he tortured them with
exceedingly cruel tortures, and very many of them suffered martyrdom at his hands.
Through him very great tribulation and sorrow came upon this father, and he entreated God
121

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
concerning it, and God destroyed the emperor in the second year of his reign. When
Diocletian the infidel reigned he afflicted the Christians and tortured them, and this father
Abba Felix prayed to God that he might not live to see the tortures of the Christians, and he
died in the early days of the year in which Diocletian ascended the throne. All the days,
which this father sat upon the Apostolic throne, were five years and a half. He composed
discourses and admonitions and exhortations, and in some of these he discussed
excommunication and the Orthodox Faith; these are exceedingly good works and are
profitable to Christians. Salutation to Felix who was chosen for the archiepiscopate, the
interpreter of the New and the Old Testaments.
And on this day also our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ and His disciples were gathered
together on Mount Kueskuam, and He consecrated His Tabernacle and Church, and
performed the consecration of the Offering with His disciples on that day. This was the
first consecration [of the Offering] on Mount Kueskuam, according to what Saint
Theophilus and Saint Cyril, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, testify concerning this
matter. Salutation to those who have taken refuge at thy feet, O Mount Kueskuam, namely
to Mary and her Child Christ.
Salutation, salutation to Josa, son of Joseph.
And on this day also are commemorated Afros, and Adinius, and Justus, and Marterus, and
Lucirius (Lucinius), and Suninus, and Bandicorus (Labandicorus), and Eulasius, and
Cornelius, and eight thousand (or seventeen thousand) martyrs of the congregation of
Isidore.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 07
(November 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint George the Great, the Alexandrian, became a martyr. The father of this
holy man was a foreigner, and he was of the men of Alexandria, and he had no son. And
the festival of the dedication of the church of Saint George the Martyr in the city of Lydda
arrived, now it was celebrated on the seventh day of Khedar, and he entreated Saint George
to intercede on his behalf with God so that He might give him a son, and he called his
name George. And the mother of this holy man was the sister of Armenius, governor of
the city of Alexandria, and when his parents died, he lived with his mother’s brother; and
his days were fifteen years. And George loved the Church. Now Armenius had an only
daughter, and [one day] she went out with her friends to divert herself, and she found a
monastery outside the city of Alexandria wherein monks were gathered together, and they
were singing sweet hymns. And the sound of their hymns and their praises came and
penetrated the heart of the maiden, and she began to ask George, the son of her father’s
sister, to tell her the meaning of the words of the hymns which the monks were singing.
And as he was explaining to her the meaning of the hymns and making her to understand
them, he told her of the punishment which would come upon sinners, and of the peace and
joy which would come upon the righteous and the virtuous. When she returned to her
122

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
father Armenius she confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before him. And Armenius began to
persuade her, and he said unto her, “O my daughter, do not this thing”; but she would
neither listen to his words nor obey him; and he commanded the soldiers to cut off her
head, and they cut it off with the sword, and she received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. And certain men told the governor, saying, “It is George, thy
sister’s son, who hath led astray thy daughter.” And the governor seized Saint George, and
after he had tortured him very severely he sent him to the city of ‘Ensena, where they
tortured him very severely, and afterwards cut off his holy head with a sword; and George
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Now there was there a
certain deacon whose name was Samuel, and he took his holy body and carried it to the
city of Manuf. And when the wife of Armenius, the brother of the mother of Saint George,
knew that George had become a martyr, she sent and took his body and placed it with the
body of her daughter in the city of Alexandria. Salutation to George.
On this day also the holy man Abba Nahrew became a martyr. This holy man [came] from
the district of the Fayyum in the country of Egypt, and he feared God exceedingly. And
when he heard the stories about the martyrs, he went to the city of Alexandria, and wished
to die for the sake of the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And [our Lord] said unto him in
a vision, “Needs must that thou go and die in the city of Antioch.” And he pondered in his
heart and said, “How can I possibly get there?” And he sought out a ship in which he
could embark. And God sent unto him the angel Michael who carried him on his wings
from the city of Alexandria, and brought him to the city of Antioch, and set him down near
Diocletian; and Nahrew confessed the Living God. And the emperor asked him his name,
and the name of his city, and Nahrew told him that he was from the country of Egypt, and
the emperor wondered about [the manner of] his coming. And the emperor tried to
persuade him [to deny Christ], and he promised him that he would give him much money,
and costly raiment, if he would submit to him and offer sacrifice to his idols, but he would
not hearken to what he said unto him. And the emperor spoke a second time, saying, “I
will torture thee with very severe tortures,” but Nahrew was neither afraid of him nor did
he obey his command. And the emperor commanded his soldiers to torture him with many
different kinds of tortures. On the first occasion he drove savage lions to attack him, on
the second he burnt him in the fire, on the third he tortured him on the wheel, and on the
fourth he boiled him in a large cauldron. When the emperor was tired to torturing him he
commanded his soldiers to cut off his head, and they cut it off and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And it came to pass that instead of being
martyred in the city of Antioch, all the martyrs who ought to have been martyred in the
city of Antioch, were martyred in the land of Egypt; and similarly this holy man Abba
Nahrew, who was from the country of Egypt, and should have been martyred in Egypt,
received the crown of martyrdom in Antioch. At that time Saint Julian dwelt in Antioch,
and he took the body of Nahrew the martyr and sent it away in charge of two of his
servants to his country with great honor. Salutation to the man who was borne on the wings
of Michael.
And on this day also died Abba Minas, Bishop of the city of Tamai. This holy man was
from the city of Gamnudi and he was the only child of his father. His parents were Godfearing folk, and they labored in the works of the monks in respect of their fasts, and
prayers, and their devotion to the ascetic life, and their fighting, and at length the report of
them was heard by all men, and by all the fathers. And they made their son to marry a wife
against his will. And when the bridegroom came into his marriage-chamber with the
123

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
maiden who called herself his wife, he made an agreement with her that they were to keep
their bodies pure and that they were not to pollute them and their virginity; and they fought
a great fight. Then Saint Minas wanted to assume the garb of the monk, and he said unto
his wife, “It is undesirable for us to do the works of the ascetic life whilst we are still living
in the world.” Now they used to wear sackcloth made of hair beneath their apparel, and
they used to stand up all night long keeping vigil, and praying, and reading the Books of
God. After this she embraced him and bade him farewell, and he departed to the
monastery of Abba Anthony, wishing, by so doing, to be far away from his parents, for
they were seeking him everywhere, and they had with them an order from the emperor
bidding him to return to his wife; but God protected him and they did not find him at all.
And Saint Minas dwelt in the monastery of Anthony for many days, and he devoted
himself to ascetic labors and fought strenuously. Now there was there with him living like
a monk Abba Michael, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. After this he left the
monastery of Saint Abba Anthony, and he departed to the monastery of Saint Abba
Macarius of Scete. In their days lived the two bright stars, Abba Abraham and Abba
Ga’argi, and Saint Abba Minas was a beloved son unto them, and he dwelt with them in
their cell. And he multiplied his labors in the angelic toil of the ascetic life, and he learned
their doctrine, and the way in which they fought, and in his fighting and piety he excelled
many of the fathers, and Abba Abraham and Abba Ga’argi, and other fathers marveled at
him. And Satan was jealous of him, and he beat him with a great beating internally, and he
lay prostrate on the ground for two months; but after this our Lord Jesus Christ raised him
up whole and unharmed, and he roared like a lion against Satan. After this our Lord Jesus
Christ summoned him to become a bishop, and the envoys of the archbishop came to him;
and he was exceedingly sorrowful and he wept because of his separation from the desert of
Scete. And the holy fathers said unto him, “Be not sorrowful, for this is from God”; and he
bowed to the Will of God, and he departed with the envoys of the archbishop, and the
archbishop made him Bishop of the city of Tamai. Now God gave him the gift of healing
the sick, and all those who were sick used to come to him, and he would pray to God for
them and they were healed straightway. And God also gave him gift of the knowledge of
hidden things, and he knew what was in the minds of men. All the bishops whose sees
were in the districts near him used to come to him from all parts, and take counsel with
him, and accept his advice, and bow to his decision; and the laity also used to come to him
from all parts of the country to hear his wise doctrine. He was the father of four
archbishops, and he laid his hand upon them when they were enthroned; now these were,
Iskander, and Cosmas, and Theodore, and Michael, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria.
When our Lord Christ wished him to depart from this transitory world this father knew by
the Holy Spirit that day of his departure. And he sent messengers and they brought all the
people who were in his diocese, and he commanded them to be strong in the Orthodox
Faith, and to keep the precepts of the Holy Gospel. Then he committed them to their True
Shepherd, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ Whom he loved. And all the people wept and
mourned the departure from them of their good shepherd and father who protected them
upon earth in the place of God, and they buried him in a fitting manner, and laid him in the
place where he had directed he should be laid. Salutation to Minas, Bishop of the city of
Tamai.
And on this day also was consecrated the church of the holy and honorable, the great one
among martyrs, George of the city of Lydda. And God wrought therein signs and great
wonders which made the hearts of men to rejoice, and at length the history [of the holy
man] and his wonderful acts were heard on sea and on land. When the Emperor
124

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Diocletian, the infidel, heard the report of the church of Saint George, and the signs and
great wonders which took place therein, he sent a captain whose name was Eukheius
together with a large company of soldiers to destroy the church. And that captain came
there with arrogance, and he went up into the tower wherein was the image (or picture) of
Saint George, and he began to scoff at the church, and at Saint George. And he had a staff
in his hand, and he struck with it the lamp which was burning before the picture (or image)
of Saint George, and he broke it, and straightway a fragment of the glass fell from it and
dropped on the head of the infidel without his knowledge. And fear and great trembling
fell upon him, and his head became filled with fever, and he fell and lay prostrate on the
ground. And his companions took him up to carry him to their own country, for they knew
well that all this which had come upon him was caused by Saint George the mighty and
victorious martyr; and whilst they were carrying him on the road that captain died in
disgrace and misery, and the soldiers took him up and cast him into the sea. When
Diocletian, the infidel emperor, heard this thing he was furiously angry, and he determined
in his heart to go himself and destroy the church of Mar Saint George; but God bore no
longer with him, and He smote him swiftly and made his eyes blind. And the men in the
palace rose up against him, and God removed him from his kingdom, and made the
righteous man Constantine emperor; and he opened the churches and closed the houses of
idols, and all the ends of the world rejoiced. And the churches rejoiced, and the church of
the holy and honorable star of the morning, George, rejoiced and was exceedingly glad.
Salutation to George the Martyr.
And on this day also Saints Zenobius and his mother Zenobia became martyrs. These
saints were from the city of Tabais, and they were elders therein, and certain men accused
them of being Christians before the emperor. And the emperor commanded his soldiers to
bring them to him, and [when they had done so] he said unto them, “What is the object of
your worship, and where is your country?” And they said unto him, “We believe in Christ,
and our city is Tabais.” And the emperor said unto them, “Sacrifice ye to the gods”; and
the saints said unto him, “We sacrifice to our God Jesus Christ and not to devils.” And the
emperor was wroth with them, and he commanded his soldiers to strip off their apparel,
and to hang them up by the hair of their heads, and to beat them with rods; and the saints
prayed to God, and straightway their fetters were unloosed. And the people saw the saints
putting on garments of light, and the governor carrying his throne and following them, and
when they saw this they cried out, saying, “Holy, Holy, Holy, God of Hosts, our Lord
Jesus Christ.” And the governor marveled and said, “The God of the Christians is great.”
Then the governor was wroth and he commanded his soldiers to hang them up on two
crosses, so that each could see the other, [and they did so,] and straightway a cloud came
from heaven, and enveloped them, and gave them manna. On the following day the
governor found them teaching the word of God, and when the people saw them they cried
out with one voice, saying, “We believe that the God of the Christians is great.” And the
governor also commanded his soldiers to make two seats and to fasten in them in an
upright position two-iron stakes, and to cast them into a red-hot oven; but God delivered
them, and the governor found them teaching the people as they were sitting upon those
seats. When the governor saw this he was filled with fury, and he commanded his servants
to dig a pit twenty cubits deep, and twenty cubits broad, and to light a fire therein and to
cast them into it; but when the saints prayed to God the fire was extinguished, and every
part of the pit became like a place swept and garnished. And the governor called the
keeper of the bath, who was carrying a vessel full of water. When the people saw this sign
they gave thanks unto God, saying, “A miracle [worked by] God for His saints.” When the
125

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
governor failed to make them submit, he commanded his soldiers to slay them, and to take
care of their bodies until the following day so that they might burn them with fire and
scatter their ashes to the winds. And when they killed them there were crashes of thunder,
and lightning, and torrents of rain, and there died through that thunderstorm fifty-four men.
During the night the believers stole the bodies of the saints and buried them, and on the
following day when the governor searched for their bodies, everyone told him that a
miracle had taken place; and the governor believed and became a Christian. Salutation to
Zenobia and to her first-born son Zenobius.
Salutation to the multitude of martyrs who suffered with Zenobius and Zenobia whilst the
heavens thundered and lightened.
And on this day also died Saint Mercurius and his brother John. These saints were the
children of Christian and God-fearing folk, and the name of the elder of them was Shanay,
but when he adopted the garb of the monk they called him “Mercurius.” The name of the
younger was Abu Farz, and him, when he adopted the garb of a monk, they called “John.”
When these saints arrived at man’s estate they departed to the monastery of Saint Theodore
the general, and they dwelt [there] under the direction of a righteous old man who served
God. And they obeyed him and did work of every kind, and they ministered to the work of
the brethren, and they did whatsoever was required in the monastery, and they endured the
cold of winter and the days of summer, and they used to gather in very many of the fruits
of the earth, and take them to the monastery. They acquired no possessions whatsoever in
the world, and they were remote from all the appetites of the world for meat, and drink,
and riches; and they used to fast two and three days at a time. And they also learned to
read and to write Coptic and Arabic without a teacher, and they fulfilled all the demands of
the Rule of the ascetic life. Whilst they were living thus one day the angel of the Lord
came and told them that they would attain to the fight of martyrdom; and then they became
strong by the Holy Spirit, and they rose up in glad haste and rejoiced. Then they came into
their own city, where accusations against them were made to the governor of the city, and
he had them taken to the governor of Behnesa. And that governor asked them questions
and said unto them, “Is it true that ye are idolaters?” And the saints said unto him, “We
confess openly that we are Christians, and we have no other God except Jesus Christ.”
When the governor heard this he was filled with wrath, and he ordered his soldiers to
throw chains about their necks and to march them round about the whole city; [and they
did so,] and then they shut them up in the prison house. Whilst they were there the angel
of the Lord visited them many times, and when they had been in prison five months the
governor had them brought out and set before him, and he said unto them, “Abandon your
Faith”; and they refused. And the governor [tried to] frighten them and said unto them, “I
will burn your bodies,” but they were not frightened by his words, and when the governor
saw the firmness of their minds, he sent them back into prison. After many days there
came another governor, and he wished to save them and to set them at liberty, and
straightway certain men reviled him and said unto him, “If thou dost not kill them we will
accuse thee to the emperor.” So against his will he commanded his soldiers to light a fire,
and they were summoned to come, but he only did this to frighten them for he wanted to
imprison them, and then he cast them into the prison house. And he commanded his
soldiers to bring them out again, and to frighten them with fierce swords, but the hearts of
the holy men did not quail, and they were unable to alter their words. Then, fearing the
people, the governor commanded his soldiers to cut off their heads. They cut off the head
of John first, and his head leaped up from his body, and there went forth from it a voice
126

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
like unto a shout of joy, and it was so loud that all the people who heard it wondered; then
they cut off the head of Saint Mercurius, and thus they finished their holy martyrdom. And
they cast their bodies in the fire, and straightway the fire was extinguished, and it did not
touch their bodies, and their raiment was not scorched. When the governor saw this he
commanded them to keep guard over their bodies so that the Christians might not steal
them. And on the following day when they looked they found a fountain of water under
the place where they had cast their bodies, and afterwards many signs and miracles were
made manifest through it. Salutation to Mercurius, whose body the fire would not burn.
Salutation to John, from whose head after it had been cut off a voice was heard.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 08
(November 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the Four Beasts, who have no bodies, and which
are the Wheels of God that bear His Divine Throne according to the testimony concerning
them by John the evangelist in his Vision, who says, “I saw a throne in heaven, and He
Who sat thereon was brighter than the sun, and more brilliant then the lightning. And I
saw in the midst four beasts, full of eyes; the first had the likeness of the face of a lion, the
second had the likeness of the face of a bull, the third had the likeness of the face of a man,
and the fourth had the likeness of the face of an eagle; and each of them had six wings.
And they cried out by day and by night, saying, “Holy, Holy, Holy, God of Hosts. All the
heavens and the earth are filled with the holiness of Thy glory” (Rev. iv, 6). And Isaiah
the prophet also said, “I saw the Lord of Hosts sitting upon a high throne, and the whole
place was filled with His glory. Seraphim and Cherubim surrounded Him, and His awe
and majesty were exceedingly great. Each of these had six wings; with two of their wings
they covered their faces, with two of their wings they covered their feet, and with two of
their wings they did fly in the greatest glory by day and by night, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of Hosts. All the heavens and the earth are filled with the holiness of Thy
glory” (Isaiah vi, 2). And David the prophet said, “He rode upon the Cherubim and did
fly” (Psalm xviii, 10), and he also said, “He Who sitteth upon the Cherubim maketh the
earth to quake,” And Ezekiel said concerning these wheels, “I saw a wind blow from
heaven, and in it there was a cloud surrounded by fire, and brightness, and lightning, and
four beasts supported Him. Each face (or person) had six wings, and they went before
them. And the first beast had the likeness of the face of a man, and they ceased not to
praise God by day and by night, and they said, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, all
the heavens and the earth are filled with the holiness of Thy glory” (Ezekiel I). And John
the evangelist said, “I heard a voice saying, Hallelujah! Salvation and power and blessing
to our God. And the four beasts and the four and twenty elders of heaven worshipped God,
saying, Hallelujah! God the Sustainer of the universe is King (Rev. xix, 4). After this I
heard a voice saying, Praise our God with harp and psalms, Hallelujah! And I heard the
voice of a multitude of peoples like unto the thunder, saying, God, the Sustainer of the
universe, is King.” And many of the Books of the Old and the New Testaments testify
concerning the honor of these Four Beasts which God hath set near Him to make
127

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
supplication on behalf of all creation. He with the man’s form maketh supplication on
behalf of the children of men, he with the lion’s form maketh supplication on behalf of the
beasts, he with the bull’s form maketh supplication on behalf of the cattle, and he with the
eagle’s form maketh supplication on behalf of the birds. Now these beasts are very much
nearer God than all the other powers of heaven. For this reason the doctors of the Church
have confirmed the commemoration of them, and have built churches to them in every
place, even as at this day, because they make supplication for the race of man. Salutation
to the Four Beasts and to the horses of the Cherubim.
And on this day also is commemorated the festival of Afnin the Archangel, one of the nine
and ninety archangels, who together with Surafel guard the throne of glory. Of him Enoch
said that he goeth round that house; and Surafel, and Kirubel, and Afnin, “These are the
[angels] who never sleep, and who guard the throne of His glory,” Salutation to this Trinity
of Angels who guard the throne of God.
And on this day also is commemorated John the high priest, and on this day the Cross
appeared unto Constantine.
And on this day also died Saint Kefrenya (Copronius). This holy man was a pagan, and
the son of a nobleman. One day there arrived in his city a monk from the monastery of
Abba Pachomius, whose name was Mercurius, and he foretold that Kefrenya (Copronius)
would become a Christian. And after a few days Kefrenya (Copronius) assembled his
soldiers, and set out for the land of Egypt, to take prisoners and to destroy monasteries and
religious houses. When he arrived at the monastery of Abba Pachomius the abbot went
forth to him, and said unto him, “What dost thou want?” And Kefrenya (Copronius) said
unto him, “I want the abbot,” and the abbot said, “I am he.” When Kefrenya (Copronius)
heard this he took the abbot aside privately, and asked him if he would array him in the
garb of the monk. When the abbot heard him he said, “I will.” And when the soldiers had
returned to their city and Kefrenya (Copronius) was left by himself, he arrayed him in the
garb of the monk, and Kefrenya (Copronius) devoted himself to fasting and prayer. And
Satan was envious of him, and he stirred up against him the rulers of the city until they
wished to attack the monastery, saying, “There is a royal son (i.e. prince) here who hath
destroyed our city; if we take him by the help of God we will kill the calumniator.” And
this holy man continued to fast for a week at a time, and he ate nothing except bitter
lupines. In those days a wild beast of the desert ravaged the [lands of the] monastery and
killed all the cattle of the monks. And Abba Kefrenya (Copronius) went to him, and laid
hold of him by his ear like a sheep, and tied him up with a cord, and he lived [there] twelve
years and died. And Saint Kefrenya (Copronius) went to Jerusalem, led by an angel of
God, and he arrived there in one night; and he saw their great mysteries and was blessed by
the holy places, and he returned to his habitation and died in peace. Salutation to Kefrenya
(Copronius), the son of a pagan, who bound in fetters a wild beast that slew the cattle.
And on this day also four hundred and eighty-four souls who belonged to the company of
Isidore became martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

128

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
HEDAR 09
(November 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Isaac, the forty-first Archbishop of Alexandria. This
father was one of the men of the city of Burles (Borlos), and his parents were exceedingly
rich, and they feared God. After very many days they begot this holy man, and they
rejoiced over him with very great joy. And having brought him to the bishop that he might
lay his hand upon him, and baptize him with Christian baptism, the bishop saw upon his
head at the time of baptism a cross of light. And the bishop took his hand and laid it upon
his head, and he prophesied concerning him, saying, “This boy shall be set over the Church
of God”; and the bishop said unto his father, “Take care of this boy, for he shall be a
chosen vessel of God.” And when the boy had grown a little he taught him to read and to
write, and he learned spiritual doctrine, and he used to read the histories of the saints. And
he left his parents and departed to the monastery of Abba Macarius, and he became a monk
under the direction of father Abba Zachariah the abbot. Now the angel of the Lord had
informed the abbot of the coming of this holy man, and the abbot received him and
rejoiced in him. One day the righteous man saw him in the church, and he prophesied
concerning him, saying, “Needs must that this Isaac shall be set over the Church of
Christ.” And in those days Abba John the archbishop was seeking for a learned man to be
his disciple and his scribe, and the honorable father Abba Isaac was recommended to him;
and the archbishop sent for him and had him brought to him, and he gave him a roll
whereon to write. And Abba Isaac made mistakes in his writing wittingly and wrote badly
in order that the archbishop might send him away and that he might be free to go to the
desert of Scete, for he hated the pomp of this world of men. And when the Archbishop
Abba John knew that Isaac had made mistakes and written badly purposely so that he
might dismiss him, Saint Abba John said unto him, “Thou hast written well, and I shall not
let thee go from here.” When Abba Isaac knew that the archbishop would not let him go,
he displayed to him all his learning and all his wisdom, and he wrote as beautifully as he
could, and the archbishop rejoiced in him exceedingly; and after a few days he returned to
the desert of Scete. When the death of the Archbishop Abba John drew nigh, he asked our
Lord Jesus Christ to tell him whom he should appoint to be archbishop in his stead after
him. And He said unto him in a vision, “Thy disciple Isaac shall protect this office after
thee”; and Saint Abba John commanded the people, and told them that his disciple Isaac
was to be appointed archbishop after him. When Abba John was dead they seized this
Saint Abba Isaac, and enthroned him Archbishop over the city of Alexandria. And he
made the Church to shine in his days, and he restored many churches, and especially the
church of Mark the evangelist and apostle, and the archbishop’s house. And great
tribulation and many trials came upon this holy father, and he sat upon the throne of Mark
the evangelist three years and a half. And it is written in the history of the fight of this
holy father that he commanded that he was not to be enthroned archbishop except on the
First Day of the week. Salutation to Isaac on whom the bishop saw a cross of light when
he dipped his hand in the water to baptize him.
And on this day also the Three Hundred and Eighteen fathers and bishops assembled in the
city of Nicea in the days of Constantine the righteous man, among them being four
archbishops, namely, Abba Alexander, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and
129

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Yunakendinos (Innocent), Archbishop of the city of Rome, Sol Peter (sic), Archbishop of
the city of Constantinia, and the Archbishop of the city of Antioch. And the cause of their
assembling was Arius, who was priest of the men of Alexandria and had fallen into error.
He said: “The Son is a created being in all His Person.” These saints were honorable
fathers and fighters, and some of them had, like the apostles, raised the dead, and healed
the sick, and worked great signs and wonders. Some of them had suffered tortures for the
sake of the Orthodox Faith of Christ, some of them had suffered torture and had their eyes
dug out; of some of them the torturers had cut off their hands and their feet, of some the
torturers had smashed their teeth, and of some they had torn out the nails and scraped their
bodies. Among those who had suffered tortures there was a certain bishop of the city of
Mar’ash whose name was Thomas. Him certain vile and evil men cast into prison for two
(?) years, where they tortured him mercilessly. Each year they had cut off from him one of
his limbs, and they had cut off his hands and his feet, and smashed his teeth, both those in
front and those in the sides of his jaws, and his nose and lips had been cut off, and his body
was as black as the ashes of a fire. Many people thought that he was dead, and had
performed memorial services for him as for the martyrs and apostles. When these fathers
and bishops arrived in the city of Nicea, Constantine the emperor prepared for them a large
and spacious hall, and he placed therein thrones whereon the holy fathers and bishops
could sit, and he set therein his own throne, which was smaller than [any one] of theirs.
And he began with Thomas, Bishop of the city of Mar’ash, and he bowed low before him,
and embraced every part of him, including the [places of] the members which had been cut
off his body. Then he gave to the fathers and bishops his royal scepter, and his sword, and
his ring, and he said unto them, “Behold, I have this day given you power over the
priesthood and over the kingdom. According to what ye wish let [every man] remain,
provided that he is Orthodox; he who is not Orthodox separate from your flock; and ye
shall formulate the Canon and the Law.” And our Lord Jesus Christ tarried among them,
and there were many [of them] whose hearts were illumined by the Holy Spirit. And
certain men counted the thrones whereon sitters were seated and they found them to be in
number three hundred and nineteen, and they counted the fathers and bishops and found
them to be in number three hundred and eighteen. And they formulated a Canon for the
priests, and for the laity, and for the emperors, and for the countries, and for pilgrims, and
for those who sold, and for those who bought, and they made ordinances for every matter.
Then they proclaimed the Orthodox Faith, and they made known that the Son was the
equal of the Father in Godhead, and they excommunicated Arius and him that believed in
his filthy belief. This is the Orthodox Faith, which they formulated, saying, “We believe in
One God, the Lord, the Father, the Sustainer of Creation, Maker of heaven and of earth,
and of all things visible and invisible. And we believe in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Only
Son of the Father, Whose being was with Him before the world was created, Light Who
proceedeth from Light, God Who proceedeth from God in truth, Who was begotten and not
made, Who is equal with the Father in Godhead, in Whom is everything that is, and
without Whom there would be nothing whatsoever which is in heaven and upon earth,
Who for the sake of us men and for our salvation came down from heaven, and was made
man by the Holy Ghost of Mariyam, the holy Virgin. He became man, and was crucified
for our sakes in the days of Pontius Pilate.He suffred and died and was buried and rose
from the dead on the third day, as it is written in the Holy Scriptures. He ascended in glory
into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of His Father. He shall come again in glory.
He shall judge the living and the dead, and there shall be no end to His kingdom.” After
this, when one hundred and fifty bishops were assembled in the city of Constantinia, they
130

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
formulated the remainder of the Orthodox Faith, saying, “And we believe in the Holy
Spirit, the Lord the Vivifier, Who sprang from the Father. We worship Him and we praise
Him, with the Father and the Son, Who spoke by the prophets”--to the end of the [words
of] the Faith (i.e. And we believe in One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church. And we
believe in one Baptism for the remission of sin and wait for the resurrection from the dead.
Life to come. World without end. Amen.). And they excommunicated anyone who
should add anything to it or take anything away from it. And they commanded that every
priest should recite it, and all the laity, both old and young, men and women, slaves and
handmaidens. And they were to recite it at the time of at the night prayer, and at the time
of the day prayer, and at the time of the consecration of the Offering, and they were to
teach it to all the people. And the fathers and bishops made ordinances of every kind for
the Church and the Orthodox Faith. They established the light of the Faith and then they
departed to their own countries.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 10
(November 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day fifty nuns, who were pure and holy virgins, together with their mother Sofia,
became martyrs. These pure and holy women came from widely separated cities and
districts, and they were gathered together by divine and spiritual love, and the desire to
assume the garb of the ascetic life, which is the garb of the angels. They dwelt in one of
the houses for virgins, which were in the city of Roha (Edessa), and they had as superior
the holy Abbess Sofia who was filled with every kind of grace and with wisdom. And she
trained them so perfectly in the duties and exercises of the spiritual life that they became
like angels upon earth, and they fasted and prayed continually, and read the histories of the
spiritual fighting of the monks. Among them were some who had dwelt in the nunnery for
seven years. And some of them were novices. The infidel Emperor Julian passed by their
house in the city of Roha (Edessa) on his way to make war on Sapor, the son of Sapor, the
King of Persia, for he had heard that Sapor was coming to make war upon him. And Julian
having gone against him and come back, he went to that nunnery wherein the virgins lived,
and he asked [an officer] what the building was. And [the officer] said unto him, “This is a
nunnery.” and Julian commanded his soldiers to go into that nunnery, and to kill everyone
in it, and to carry off all the goods which were therein. And the soldiers of the infidel
emperor went into the nunnery, and they beat the virgins with whips and cut off their heads
with swords, and they plundered everything which was there. And because of this thing
the Lord took vengeance upon him with the vengeance of His wrath, that is to say, Saint
Mercurius the martyr speared him with his spear whilst he was engaged in fighting, and he
cast him from his horse, and killed him. And Julian died an evil death, and he departed to
the Sheol which is forever. And these holy virgins went into everlasting joy, and inherited
the kingdom of heaven. Salutation to the virgins whose blood Mercurius avenged.
And on this day also a General Council of the Saints took place in the days of Victor,
Archbishop of the city of Rome, and in the days of Demetrius, Archbishop of the city of
131

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Alexandria. Now the cause for the assembling of this Council was this: Christian people
were baptized on the festival of baptism, on the twenty-first day of the month Ter (Jan. Feb.), and from the following day they fasted until the twenty-second day of the month
Yakatit (Feb. - March), that is to say, for forty days, and then they ate. And after thirty
days they began, on the twenty-third day of Magabit (March - April), and kept the Octave
of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the festival of His Resurrection, for the
Crucifixion of our Lord took place on the twenty-ninth day of Magabit. After Demetrius,
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, had been enthroned, God illumined the heart of a
certain artisan, who knew not how to read or to write, with Divine grace, and he learned all
the Laws of the Church, and he knew them by heart, and he interpreted them. Then by the
Holy Spirit he compiled a table for reckoning the Epact, wherefrom men might know [the
days of] the Fast, and the Resurrection; and he wrote in the Coptic and Greek (Rom)
tongues. Then he made a copy of this table of Epact and sent it to Victor, Archbishop of
the city of Rome, he read it and found it good and rejoiced therein exceedingly. And he
sent and gathered together a large assembly containing fourteen bishops of his diocese, and
many learned priests, and he read to them the calculation of the Epact, and they found it
very good, and they rejoiced in it, and accepted it, and they wrote many copies of it and
sent them into all countries. And the Holy Fast and the Festival of Easter have been
regulated by that circulation from that day to this. And they departed to their countries
praising the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, to Whom be glory and honor.
Salutation to Demetrius and to the priests who made haste to assemble in order to make
rules for times for keeping Lent and Easter.
On this day Paul and his three companions became martyrs.
Salutation to Gabra Maryam.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 11
(November 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day fifty nuns, who were pure and holy virgins, together with their mother Sofia,
became martyrs. These pure and holy women came from widely separated cities and
districts, and they were gathered together by divine and spiritual love, and the desire to
assume the garb of the ascetic life, which is the garb of the angels. They dwelt in one of
the houses for virgins, which were in the city of Roha (Edessa), and they had as superior
the holy Abbess Sofia who was filled with every kind of grace and with wisdom. And she
trained them so perfectly in the duties and exercises of the spiritual life that they became
like angels upon earth, and they fasted and prayed continually, and read the histories of the
spiritual fighting of the monks. Among them were some who had dwelt in the nunnery for
seven years. And some of them were novices. The infidel Emperor Julian passed by their
house in the city of Roha (Edessa) on his way to make war on Sapor, the son of Sapor, the
King of Persia, for he had heard that Sapor was coming to make war upon him. And Julian
having gone against him and come back, he went to that nunnery wherein the virgins lived,
132

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and he asked [an officer] what the building was. And [the officer] said unto him, “This is a
nunnery.” and Julian commanded his soldiers to go into that nunnery, and to kill everyone
in it, and to carry off all the goods which were therein. And the soldiers of the infidel
emperor went into the nunnery, and they beat the virgins with whips and cut off their heads
with swords, and they plundered everything which was there. And because of this thing
the Lord took vengeance upon him with the vengeance of His wrath, that is to say, Saint
Mercurius the martyr speared him with his spear whilst he was engaged in fighting, and he
cast him from his horse, and killed him. And Julian died an evil death, and he departed to
the Sheol which is forever. And these holy virgins went into everlasting joy, and inherited
the kingdom of heaven. Salutation to the virgins whose blood Mercurius avenged.
And on this day also a General Council of the Saints took place in the days of Victor,
Archbishop of the city of Rome, and in the days of Demetrius, Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. Now the cause for the assembling of this Council was this: Christian people
were baptized on the festival of baptism, on the twenty-first day of the month Ter (Jan. Feb.), and from the following day they fasted until the twenty-second day of the month
Yakatit (Feb. - March), that is to say, for forty days, and then they ate. And after thirty
days they began, on the twenty-third day of Magabit (March - April), and kept the Octave
of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the festival of His Resurrection, for the
Crucifixion of our Lord took place on the twenty-ninth day of Magabit. After Demetrius,
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, had been enthroned, God illumined the heart of a
certain artisan, who knew not how to read or to write, with Divine grace, and he learned all
the Laws of the Church, and he knew them by heart, and he interpreted them. Then by the
Holy Spirit he compiled a table for reckoning the Epact, wherefrom men might know [the
days of] the Fast, and the Resurrection; and he wrote in the Coptic and Greek (Rom)
tongues. Then he made a copy of this table of Epact and sent it to Victor, Archbishop of
the city of Rome, he read it and found it good and rejoiced therein exceedingly. And he
sent and gathered together a large assembly containing fourteen bishops of his diocese, and
many learned priests, and he read to them the calculation of the Epact, and they found it
very good, and they rejoiced in it, and accepted it, and they wrote many copies of it and
sent them into all countries. And the Holy Fast and the Festival of Easter have been
regulated by that circulation from that day to this. And they departed to their countries
praising the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, to Whom be glory and honor.
Salutation to Demetrius and to the priests who made haste to assemble in order to make
rules for times for keeping Lent and Easter.
On this day Paul and his three companions became martyrs.
Salutation to Gabra Maryam.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

133

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
HEDAR 12
(November 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the honored angel, Michael the archangel, the head
of the hosts of heaven, the angel who is merciful to the children of men, who standeth at all
times before the great throne of God speaking on behalf of the children of man. Joshua the
son of Nun saw him in great glory like unto that of a general of the king’s army, and he
was frightened at him and fell down and made obeisance unto him, and said unto him, “O
my lord, art thou on our side or on the side of the enemy?” And Michael said unto him, “I
am the tenth of the Chiefs of the mighty armies of heaven, and this day I will give Amalek
into thy hand, and I will make thee king in the city of Jericho.” This angel it was who was
with all the saints and martyrs, and he made them strong and enabled them to endure
patiently until they finished their strife, [and it is meet] that festivals of commemoration
should be held, and gifts offered in his name on the twelfth day of each month, for he
beseecheth God for the fruits of the earth, and the descent of the rains, and the [flooding of
the] rivers, and for good souls so that God may make perfect all of them in integrity. Now,
there was a certain God-fearing man whose name was Dorotheus, and [he had a] wife
whose name was Theopista, and they were wont to make festivals of commemoration for
the honored angel Michael. And all the money of these righteous folk came to an end, and
they had nothing wherewith to celebrate the commemoration of the honored Michael. And
because they were exceedingly sorrowful about this they took their apparel to sell so that
they might make a feast. And Michael the archangel appeared unto Dorotheus and
commanded him to go to a sheep-master and to take from him a sheep worth one-third of a
dinar. And he was also to go to a fisherman and to take from him a fish worth one-third of
a dinar, and he was not to slit the belly thereof except inside the house. And he was also to
go to a flour merchant, and to take from him as much flour as he wanted. And the angel
said, “Do this, and do not sell thy raiment”; and Dorotheus did as the angel commanded
him. And he summoned all the people according to his custom, and he made a feast in
honor of the angel Michael. When he had gone into his store-chamber to see if,
peradventure, he could find a jar of wine for the Offering, he found the interior of his
chamber filled with wine, and much flour; and Dorotheus was frightened and he marveled
exceedingly. When he had ministered unto all the company, and they had finished the
feast, and all the people had departed to their houses, the honored angel appeared unto the
blessed Dorotheus in the garb wherein he had appeared unto him before, and commanded
him to cut open the belly of the fish. When he had cut open the belly of the fish he found
therein three hundred dinars of gold, and three third parts of a dinar. And the archangel
Michael said unto Dorotheus and his wife, “Set aside these three third parts of a dinar for
the sheep, the fish, and the flour, and these three hundred dinars shall be for your own
needs. God hath remembered you and the alms and oblations which ye have been wont to
make, and hath rewarded you for the same here in this world, and at the last day He will
make you to inherit the kingdom of heaven.” And as they were frightened at this matter he
said unto them, “I am Michael the archangel who hath delivered you from all your
tribulation, and it is I who have loved your alms and oblations, and have taken them up to
God. Henceforward ye shall lack no good thing whatsoever in this world.” And they
prostrated themselves before him, and he disappeared and went up into heaven. And the
angel Michael worked so many miracles that they are innumerable. Salutation to thee, O
134

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
merciful angel Michael whom I have feared from my youth up; hide me under thy prayers
at dawn and at eve.
And on this day also died the holy father Philotheus, the sixty-third Archbishop of the city
of Alexandria. In the days of his archiepiscopate the King of Ethiopia sent a letter to
George, King of Noba, and he said unto him: “God is wroth with us because of what the
kings who were before us have done. For they transgressed the commandment of God,
concerning Abba Peter, the bishop, whom they drove out of his diocese, and they
appointed in his stead Minas the liar, in the days of Cosmas the archbishop; and, behold,
six archbishops have [not] appointed a bishop to our country. And because of this our
country is destroyed, and all our men and beasts have perished through famine and plague.
Our enemies have risen up against us and have carried away captive many men from our
country and have plundered our cities. The rain hath been withheld and it falls not, and the
earth will not give her fruit, and our enemies have burnt our cities, and plundered the
churches, and driven us from place to place. I beseech thee to show friendship to me in
this trouble, for God’s sake, and for the sake of the Orthodox Faith. And do thou write a
letter to our father the Archbishop Abba Philotheus of Egypt, and entreat him for God’s
sake to absolve us, and to open up our country, and to pray for us so that God may remove
from us and from our country the tribulation and trial which have come upon us, and may
have compassion upon us and may appoint us a bishop, and may send him to us according
to what was always done for our fathers, so that the bishop may pray to God on our behalf
to remove His wrath from us. And this which I am saying unto thee I say, O my brother
king, because I fear [that if a bishop be not sent] the Christian Faith will perish from
among us. And behold, from that time unto this day six archbishops have been enthroned,
and they have neither remembered our country nor appointed us a bishop. And we have
become like unto sheep which have been turned out, and have no shepherd. Our bishops,
and priests, and kings have died, and our churches have been pulled down; but we
acknowledge that this tribulation hath come upon us rightly in return for what we did to
our Bishop Abba Peter.” And when the letter of the King of Ethiopia came to King
George in Noba, and he had read it, he was exceedingly sorry that trials and tribulation had
come upon the country of Ethiopia. And straightway George, King of Noba, wrote a letter
and sent it to Archbishop Abba Philotheus, and in it described to him all the trials and
tribulation which had come upon the country of Ethiopia, and he besought him to have
compassion upon the Christian people of the country of Ethiopia and to appoint them a
bishop. When the archbishop heard this he sent straightway to the desert of Scete, to a
certain righteous monk, and that monk, whose name was Abba Daniel, came forthwith to
him from the monastery of Abba Macarius, and he appointed him bishop of the Ethiopians
and sent him to them. And when Abba Daniel arrived in Ethiopia the people received him
with great honor, and he removed the wrath [of God] from them, and he made them to
conquer their enemies who had rebelled against them in times past. And all his work was
right during the days of this Archbishop, Abba Philotheus, and he made manifest many
signs and wonders. Salutation to Philotheus the apostle.
Salutation to ‘Admas. [Omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
[On this day died Ba’eda Maryam I, King of Ethiopia, who died on Nov. 8, A.D. 1478.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
135

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
HEDAR 13
(November 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
The doctors of the Law command us on this day to make a feast in honor of the thousands
of thousands of spirit beings who have no bodies, and who make intercessions for all the
world, and of whom Enoch speaks, saying, “I was in the waters, and the winds and the
clouds carried me up and brought me into a house which was built with a tongue of fire,
and I saw there thousands of thousands.” And he also says, “I saw the children of the
angels standing upon flames of fire and their apparel was as white as snow.” And Jacob
says, “I saw in the mount of Bethel a ladder on the earth which reached even to the
heavens, and the angels of God were ascending and descending on it.” And Jacob also
says, when he returned from Syria, “I saw hosts of angels.” And Moses says, “Arrange the
people each [tribe] on its own border, and the number of each was as the angels of God.”
And Moses also says, “God came from Sinai, He appeared unto me in Seir, and with Him
were His angels.” And David says, “Who makes His angels spirits, and those who
minister unto Him a flame of fire.” And he also says, “The chariots of God are thousands,
and the tens of thousands who rejoice.” Elijah also saw the chariots of fire and the horses
of fire surrounding him like a wall. And Daniel says, “And the Ancient of Days sat, and
His apparel was as white as snow, and the hair of His head was as wool. His throne was a
blazing fire, and the wheels thereof were red-hot coals, and a river of fire flowed out there
from. Thousands of thousands ministered unto Him, and tens of thousands stood before
Him.” And Luke says, “Suddenly there came with that angel multitudes of the hosts of
heaven, and they praised God, saying, Glory [be] to God in the heavens, and peace upon
earth, [and] His goodwill to the children of men. Then the angels passed from them, and
went up into the heavens.” And Matthew says, “And behold, angels came and ministered
unto Him.” And he also says, “Then shall the Son of man come in His glory, and all His
angels with Him.” And John says in the words of Jesus Christ, “Verily, verily, I say unto
you, ye would see the heavens opening, and the angels of God ascending and descending
to the Son of man.” And Judah says, “Behold, God shall come with His thousands of
saints.” And the heads of the Church have enumerated the various kinds of angels thus:
Angels, Archangels, Lords (Virtues), Dominions, Powers, Thrones and Principalities.
Salutation to the tens of thousands of tens of thousands of angels and to the Cherubim and
to the Seraphim.
And on this day also died Saint ‘Askanafer, the chief of the thirteen thieves who became
Christians of His Faith. This ‘Askanafer was one of the nobles of Rome, and he gave alms
to the poor and needy. Now, in those days there was a gang of thirteen robbers who
destroyed the travelers whom they found on the road. When they heard the story of
‘Askanafer, and that he succored the monks, they went to him to kill him by an ambush,
and to take his money. Then they dressed themselves in the garb of monks, and stood by
the gate of his courtyard, and when ‘Askanafer saw them he thought that they were the
Twelve Apostles, and that one of them was Christ. And he bowed low before them, and
took them into his house, and he brought a table of food to them, and then he washed their
feet, and he sprinkled the water on his son who was paralyzed, and had been ill for five and
thirty years, and he was healed immediately. When the thieves saw this they were greatly
frightened. And ‘Askanafer said unto them, “Tell me, O my fathers, which of you is
136

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Christ? Show Him to me that I may worship Him.” And when the men of the city heard
that the son of the nobleman was healed, they came to him, and they bowed low before
[the thieves], and they said unto them, “O saints of God, bless us and heal our sick folk.”
Then the thieves took out their daggers and gave them to the nobleman, [and their chief]
said unto him, “Take these knives so that thou mayest kill us even as we wished to kill
thee.” And ‘Askanafer said unto them, “Ye say this that ye may abase yourselves.” And
they said unto him, “God would have trodden us in the dust if we could not have boasted
ourselves of thy prayer”; and after they had spoken thus they embraced him. And each of
them took a few lentils in a bag, and they departed [on a journey] of twenty-five days, and
they sowed the lentils in the sand, and at the time of sunset they ate three (sic) lentils. And
they lived thus for thirty years, and then the Arami (i.e., desert robbers) came and killed
them. Salutations to ‘Askanafer who raised a paralytic from his couch and healed him.
Salutation also to the thieves who fought a fight for thirty years as the result of seeing this
miracle.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Timothy, Bishop of the city of Ensena.
This holy man was righteous and chaste from his youth, and he fought a great fight in
working righteousness. And the governor of the city seized him because of his faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ, and because he taught His own True Faith to men, and he tortured him
with severe tortures for many days, and he shut him up in the prison house, and he tortured
him continually during a period of three years. And there were with him in the prison
house many saints who were bound in fetters for the Faith. And that infidel governor had
them brought out of the prison house, and he tortured them, and he poured out their holy
blood until at length only a very few prisoners remained in the prison house, and among
these was this holy man Timothy. At that time God blotted out the Emperor Diocletian,
the infidel, and the God-loving Emperor Constantine reigned. And an Edict came from
him into every country ordering that those who were believers on Christ should be brought
out of the prisons, and they brought out from the prison house this holy man among those
who were released. And this holy man departed to his house, and he gathered together the
monks and the priests who were in his diocese, and he made a long prayer [which lasted]
from evening to daybreak wherein he entreated God for the salvation of the soul of that
governor who had tortured him, and he prayed thus: “O Lord, have mercy upon that
governor, for it is he who hath brought me great good, and who hath been the means of
bringing me nigh unto Thee, O my Lord. In the same manner, O Lord, do Thou work upon
him so that he may believe in Thee, and may come to Thee,” And the people marveled at
the simplicity (or innocence) of heart of this father, and they told the governor, saying,
“Abba Timothy is praying to God for thee that He may have mercy upon thee, and may
deliver thy soul.” When the governor heard this thing he marveled exceedingly, and he
said, “I should have thought that he would curse me rather because of the punishments
which I have inflicted upon him, and he obtained from him knowledge of the Law of the
Christians, and this father revealed to him the causes of the Incarnation of the Son of God,
and how the prophets spoke concerning Him in the beginning, many years ago, and how
their prophecies were fulfilled, and how the matter concerning Him is written in the Holy
Gospel. And the governor believed on our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ through this
holy man, and he baptized him with holy Christian Baptism. And the governor forsook his
office, and became a monk, and was numbered among the folk of this father. And during
the remainder of his days this father continued to teach his flock at all times, and to
confirm them in the Orthodox Faith, and he died in the peace of God. Salutation to
Timothy.
137

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day died the holy father Zachariah, the sixty-fourth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. He was a native of the city of Alexandria, and was a priest therein, and he was
steward of all the property of the Church. And he was chaste in his striving, and a virgin in
body, and gentle in disposition, and an old man in his days. When Archbishop Philotheus
died, the bishops assembled in order to elect with the counsel of God the man who was fit
for this office. And as they were all gathered together in the church of Saint Mark, the
evangelist and apostle, and discussing together who was the most suitable man for this
office, behold, they heard that a certain man had obtained from the emperor a letter by
bribery, and that he had with him slaves and soldiers from the emperor who were going to
appoint him archbishop against the wishes of the bishops. And the bishops were sorry that
an archbishop should be appointed by bribery, and by the transgression of the Canon and
commandment of the Apostles, and they prayed continually and entreated God, the
Glorious and Most High, to appoint him whom they had chosen. And as they were praying
to God behold this father came down the stairs of the roof of the church, and he had in his
hand a vessel of acid (vinegar ?), and as he was coming down his foot slipped, and he fell
from the top of the roof-stairs to the bottom. And he lifted himself up still holding in his
hand the vessel, which was unbroken, and the acid was unspilled. When the bishops and
the priests saw this they marveled exceedingly. And the people of the city of Alexandria
enquired concerning this holy man Abba Zachariah, and they talked about his virtues and
his righteousness, and all the men of the city of Alexandria agreed with the bishops about
the appointment of this holy man as archbishop, and they enthroned him. And during the
days of his rule great tribulation came upon him, and he sorrowed greatly through the King
of Egypt, Hakam, that is to say the governor. In those days there came unto him a certain
monk from the monastery of Abba Macarius, and he said unto him, “Make me a bishop.”
And Abba Zachariah said unto him, “Have patience, O my son, and do not transgress the
command of the Canon of the Apostles, but return to thy monastery, and fight for the
salvation of thy soul, and God’s Will shall be done.” When the monk heard these words he
became full of rage, and Satan entered into his heart, and he went to the King of Egypt,
that is to say the governor, and made to him false accusations against Saint Abba
Zachariah. And the king seized the holy man and shut him up in prison, and then he cast
him to the lions so that they might rend him, but the lions would not go near him at all.
And the king was wroth with the keeper of the lions, and he thought that he had taken a
bribe from the archbishop. Then the king starved the lions, and took some of the blood of
an ox and smeared the archbishop therewith, and threw him to the lions to eat; but they
would not go near him at all; and the king marveled at this thing, and he took the
archbishop from among the lions. Then he shut him up in prison for three months, and he
was always saying unto him, “If thou dost not forsake the Christian Faith, and if thou dost
not enter my own faith, I will punish thee, and will kill thee with the sword, and will cast
thee again to the lions, and if I do not that I will cast thee into the fire.” But Saint Abba
Zachariah was strong in the True Faith, and he was not in any way afraid of him. Then the
king made him many promises, and said unto him, “If thou wilt hearken unto my
command, and wilt enter my faith, I will give thee much money, and I will appoint thee
judge over every judge.” But he did not listen to him in the least degree, and he did not
turn aside from the least of the good works, which he was wont to do, and he answered and
said unto him, “If thou wert to give me all the kingdom of this world, I would not forsake
the True Faith.” After this the king shut him up in prison for a few days, and then he
released him from the prison house. And when Saint Zachariah came forth from the prison
house he departed to the desert of Scete, and very many bishops went with him through
138

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
fear of the governor. And in those days the king commanded [his people] to destroy all the
churches in the countries under his dominion. And he made very many Christians to
forsake their Faith after he had tortured them with very severe tortures; and the Christian
peoples lived in this state of tribulation of nine years, and during this period of nine years
[the Muslims] destroyed the churches. At the end of nine years Christ had compassion on
his people, and He turned away his wrath from them, and He removed from them all this
tribulation. And the king, that is to say, governor, commanded [the Christians] to build
churches everywhere in the countries under his dominion, and he gave back to them all the
goods and money which he had taken from them, and the lands which were endowments of
the Church; and all the churches were built, or rebuilt and restored with more than their
former splendor. And this father Abba Zachariah built many churches, and the king, that is
to say, governor, commanded the Christians to blow a trumpet in the churches, and to
rejoice at their times of prayer and when they celebrated the Holy Eucharist. And the
Christians lived in great happiness under the right observance of the Law of the Church
and of believers, and this father continued to build and to endow churches for twelve years.
One day a bishop whose name was Mercurius came to him, and his body was leprous.
And Abba Zachariah said unto him gently and with kindliness of heart, “O my brother,
Abba Mercurius, I will help thee because of this disease which hath come upon thee. And
thou knowest that God said unto Moses, ‘Thou shalt accept the person of no man in respect
of right judgment.’ The priesthood is not fitting for thee whilst this disease is upon thee,
unless God shall remove this disease from thee, for the Book calls it unclean.” And
Mercurius the bishop wept and said unto him, “O my father, help me by thy prayer”; and
he went away from him, and departed and went into the church of our Lady, the holy
Virgin Mary, which was in his diocese, and he stood up before the picture of our Lady
Mary, and he wept, and prayed and entreated and made supplication to her to cleanse him
from this disease. And he did this from the morning of the Second Day until the ninth hour
of the Fourth Day of the week; he invoked [the Virgin] and he prayed by day and by night.
And at the ninth hour, being weary, he rested his head against the wall whereon was the
image of our Lady Mary, and he saw the hand of the image rubbing his body. And he
awoke straightway, and he found that his body was cleansed of the leprosy, and he rejoiced
with a great joy; and he praised our Lord Jesus Christ, and gave thanks to our Lady, the
holy Virgin Mary. And straightway his disciple came to him, and he said unto him,
“Come, O my son, and look at my body, for behold our Lady Mary hath healed me of my
disease by her prayers, and it befits me to stay in this place for three days in order to thank
my Lord Christ for the gracious gift which He hath bestowed upon me.” Then he ate a
little bread, and drank a little water, and he remained in that church until the beginning of
the Sabbath. Then he rose up and went to the Archbishop Abba Zachariah when he was in
the church on the First Day of the week and informed him of what had happened to him,
and he said unto him, “It hath all happened through thy prayer.” And Saint Abba
Zachariah answered and said unto him, “God hath looked upon thy pure heart and thy
humility, and hath cleansed thee from thy disease, and hath received thy prayer, and thy
tears. And now it is meet for thee to consecrate the Holy Mysteries, and to administer
them to us so that we may be blessed by the grace which thou hast received.” And when
the Holy Eucharist had been administered, all those who were in the church were blessed
thereby, and they marveled exceedingly at this miracle, and they glorified God the Worker
of wonders. On another occasion a certain deacon came to Saint Abba Zachariah the
archbishop, and he bowed down before him weeping abundantly, and he kissed his feet
and said unto him, “Have compassion upon me, O my lord, for I have gone astray and have
139

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
fallen into sin, and straightway all my body hath become leprous.” And Abba Zachariah
said unto him, “O my son, art thou able to persevere in fasting before our Lord Jesus
Christ?” And the deacon said unto him, “Yea, O my father, command me to do
whatsoever thou wishes, and I will do (it).” And straightway the archbishop brought him
into a dark chamber, by him, and he stood there and turned his face to the east, and he said
unto the deacon, “O my son, pray to God, and entreat Him with tears by day and by night
without ceasing, and repent, and return not to [thy] sins.” And after three days and three
nights Abba Zachariah gave him a little bread by measure and a little water, and Abba
Zachariah ate and drank in the same manner. And after fifteen days Abba Zachariah
visited him and said unto him, “Be not afraid.” And after one month was ended Abba
Zachariah visited him, and uncovered his body, and he saw that the leprosy was
diminishing on his body; and he said unto him, “Be not afraid.” And after four days he
visited him again, and he found that his body was free from leprosy, and he washed him
with water and anointed him with oil. And he prayed over him and said unto him, “O my
son, know thyself. Behold, thou art healed of thy disease; commit sin no more.” And the
archbishop sent him away to his house rejoicing and praising God. And God wrought very
many signs and wonders by the hand of this Saint, Archbishop Abba Zachariah. Now he
[lived] in the sixth hundred and ninety-first year of the Holy Martyrs (i.e. A.D. 975). He
sat as archbishop eight and twenty years; of that period he passed seven years in rest and
peace, nine years in tribulation, and twelve years in joy and in building churches. And he
departed to God and died in peace, and entered into the kingdom of heaven. Salutation to
Abba Zachariah who succeeded Philotheus, and whom the lions refused to eat.
And on this day also are commemorated Lestelia, and Mekrona, and Mariana, and
Philopator, and ‘Abrani, and the Emperor Honorius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 14
(November 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Canitus, that is to say Marcius (Martianus), Bishop of the
country of Thrace. This holy man was a native of the city of Sorpeia, and his parents were
Christians; he was an ascetic, and a fighter, and he was gentle and good. He persecuted the
followers of Arius continually, and he rebuked them, and cursed them, and called them
“infidels”; because of this and through them a very great tribulation came upon him. And
they used to lie in wait for him in the market places, and when he passed they seized him
on many occasions, and punished him and beat him, and very often they dragged him
about through the city by his feet. And he fled from them to a city, which was afar off, and
he came to the shore of the Red Sea and he dwelt there in a cave for many years, and he
lived upon what grew out of the ground. And when the history of him was noised abroad,
and his spiritual contending and his excellence, God chose him to be a bishop. When he
had been made Bishop of the country of Thrace, he adopted in his diocese the course of life
which was followed by the Apostles, and he was superior to many men in love (or charity)
and mercy, and God made manifest through him many miracles. Once when he was
140

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
passing by he saw a dead man whom a wicked man had seized [for debt]; he was an
obstinate and a stupid man by nature, and he would not allow the kinsfolk of the dead to
bury the body, saying, “He owes me four hundred dinars of gold, and they shall not bury
him unless they give me this [sum of money].” And this holy man entreated him, and
rebuked him seriously, and said unto him, “Release this dead body so that [his kinfolk]
may bury him”; and the man would not hearken unto him. And the holy man prayed and
entreated God, and he raised up the dead man, and rebuked the man who had seized him,
before the people, saying, “Why dost thou utter lies over him and hast no fear of God?”
Then he prayed to God and that avaricious man died, and he who had been dead went alive
to his house, and he lived for many years after this. And this holy man finished his good
course, and he pleased God, and he died in peace. Salutation to Marcius (Martianus), who
was full of grace and goodness, and who raised a man from the dead.
And on this day also died Abba Daniel, who worked miracles for the King of Persia, and
made him to believe on the Name of Jesus Christ. Now the cause of his believing was this:
The King of Persia was sick of a grievous sickness in his belly, and the physicians who
dealt in magic could not heal him; and the King of Persia had a very wise magician, but he
was unable to heal him. And when the king wished to kill the magician because of his
failure to heal him, the magician spoke unto him with cunning words, saying, “O King,
seek out a child, and let his mother bind him with fetters, and let his father cut his throat
and bring to thee his heart, and when thou hast eaten it thou wilt recover.” Now the
magician said this because he believed that the king would be afraid to do this thing, but
the king gave one thousand dinars in gold to the captain of his guard and told him to go
and search in the city for such a child and to buy him. Now there were in the city two poor
people, a man and his wife, and they had a little son, and when they heard the voice of the
herald, the love of money led them astray, and weeping they took their son to the king; and
the child said, “I have confidence in God Who created me, and He will save me.” Then his
mother bound him with fetters, and his father drew his knife to cut the throat of his son
before the king and his nobles, and the child lifted up his eyes to heaven and he spoke with
his lips but uttered no sound. And God put compassion in the heart of the king, and he
commanded [the father] to release the boy and to bring him to him. And the king said,
“What didst thou say when thou didst lift thine eyes up to heaven?” And the boy said, “O
my lord, if a man is oppressed his father and his mother ought to deliver him, and if the
mother is serious the king and his nobles ought to deliver him. As for me, seeing that there
was no salvation for me from all of you, I prayed to God Who created me.” When the king
heard his words of instruction he gave him one thousand dinars of gold. And because of
this God wished to have compassion on the king, and He sent unto him Daniel to heal him,
and when Daniel came to him he worked many miracles, and the king believed on the
Name of Jesus Christ. And Daniel baptized him and all his men with Christian baptism,
and the king was cured of his disease. Then Abba Daniel departed to his own city, and he
continued to strive strenuously, and he died in peace. Salutation to Daniel the monk who
healed the King of Persia.
And on this day also died Abba John of the monastery of Bizan. And on this day are
commemorated Garses and Balaten. Salutation to him that rebuked the foolish peoples by
withholding the rain and dew for a period of three years, that is to say, to John the priest.
And on this day also are commemorated Laurestus, and Andreas, and the consecration of the
church of the monastery of Kalmon, and Mabranus, and Tratina, and Justina.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

141

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
HEDAR 15
(November 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Minas became a martyr; now the interpretation of his name is
“believing” and “faithful.” The father of this holy man was a native of the city of Nakiyos
and his name was Eudoxius, and he was a governor and a nobleman. And his brother was
envious of him, and he made accusations against his brother Eudoxius to the king; and the
king sent him to ‘Afrakya (Phrygia?) and made him governor over that country; and the
men of that country rejoiced in him, for he was a merciful man, and he feared God. Now
the mother of Saint Minas had no son. One day she went into the church on the festival of
our Lady, the holy Virgin Mary, and she saw the children of the church wearing beautiful
apparel and going into the church. And she moaned and wept before the image (or picture)
of our Lady, the holy Virgin Mary, and she entreated her to pray on her behalf to God so
that He might give her a son; and a voice came forth from the image of our Lady, the holy
Virgin Mary, saying, “Amen.” And straightway that woman went to her house and she
told her husband about the voice which she had heard from the image of our Lady Mary,
and her husband said unto her, “God’s Will be done!” And after a certain number of days
God gave unto her this holy son, and she called his name “Minas,” according to the word,
which she had heard from the image of the Virgin Mary. And when the child had grown
up a little, [his father] taught him the Scriptures and the doctrine of the spirit. And when
he was eleven years old his father died at a good old age, and three years later his mother
died. And Saint Minas remained by himself, fasting and praying, and because of the
greatness of the affection, which the governors of the city had for his father and for
himself, he did abandon the worship of Christ. And when Diocletian had denied Christ, he
commanded all men to worship idols, and very many suffered martyrdom for the sake of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Then Minas abandoned the place where he lived and departed to the
desert, and he dwelt there very many days and fought a great fight there. One day he saw
the heavens open and the martyrs crowned with beautiful crowns, and he heard a voice,
which said, “He who toileth for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ shall receive this
crown.” And he returned to the city and believed on the Name of Jesus Christ. And many
men knowing that he belonged to a noble and honorable family tried to dissuade him from
this, and the governor also promised him honors and many other things, but he would
neither obey his behest nor turn from his own good counsel. Then straightway the
governor commanded his soldiers to torture him with severe tortures, and when he was
tired of torturing him he commanded them to cut off his head with the sword; and they cut
off his head straightway, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens; and very many men heard of his martyrdom for the sake of the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And the governor commanded his soldiers to cast the body of the holy man
into the fire, [and they did so,] but certain believing men took his body out of the fire; now
the flames had neither scorched it nor burnt it and no harm whatsoever had befallen it.
And they swathed it in beautiful grave clothes and laid it in a certain place until the days of
persecution were ended. In those days the men of the district of Mareotis wished to collect
an army from Pentapolis, and they took the body of Saint Minas with them so that it might
be a help unto them, and might protect them on the way. And when they were in the ship,
and the body of Saint Minas was with them, beasts came up out of the sea with faces like
the faces of serpents and necks like the necks of camels, and they stretched out their necks
142

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
towards the body of the saint and licked it; and the crew of the ship were afraid with a
great fear. And fire went forth from the body of the saint, and burned the faces of the
beasts. And having arrived at the city of Alexandria and the men having finished their
work, they wished to return to their country, and they sought to take the body of Saint
Minas with them. Having lifted it upon a camel, the camel would not get up from his place;
and when they had lifted it on to a second camel, that camel also would not get up, and
although they beat it with many stripes it would not move at all. Then they knew that this
was the Will of God, and they built a shrine over him, and buried him therein and departed.
And God wished to reveal the body of Saint Minas. Now there was in that desert a certain
shepherd, and one day a sheep that was sick of a disease and had running sores went into
the shrine, and slipped down into the water of the well which was by the side of the shrine,
and having rolled about in it the sheep was healed straightway. When the shepherd saw
this thing and this miracle, he marveled exceedingly and was frightened. And he used to
take some dust from the shrine, and wet it with water, and smear it over the sheep when
they were sick, and straightway they were healed thereby. And he used to do this always,
and he healed all the sick persons who came to him by this thing. And the Emperor
Constantine heard of the report of this--now he had an only daughter who was sick through
running sores--and he sent her to this place, but she could not strip herself naked because
there were men there. And the princess asked the shepherd what he did when he healed the
sick sheep, and the shepherd told her what he did. And she took dust from that place, and
moistened it with water from that well, and she smeared her whole body therewith, and she
slept that night in the shrine. And Saint Minas appeared and said unto her. “When thou
risest up in the morning, dig, and thou shalt find my body”; and straightway she was
healed of her disease. And when she rose up [and found that] she was healed of her
disease, she commanded [her servants] to dig in that place, and straightway she found the
body of Saint Minas. And she rejoiced with an exceeding great joy, and she sent [a letter]
to her father, and told him of this matter, and the emperor built a church over his body.
And a beautiful church was built in his honor in the days of Arcadius and Honorius, the
righteous emperors, and they commanded the people to build a great city there. And a
great city was built there, as the righteous emperors commanded, and they laid the body of
Saint Minas in the church, and miracles and great wonders took place through his body.
And sick people of all nations used to come into that church, and they were healed, and
signs and wonders used to appear in that church. And Satan was envious, and he stirred up
certain wicked men and they pulled down the church, and the city was plundered, and they
removed the body of Saint Minas. And they built another church for him there, and laid
his body therein, and signs and wonders took place therein which were far greater than
those, which had taken place in the former church. Salutation to thee, O Minas, officer and
nobleman, for whom thy mother prayed to the image of the Virgin Mary.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Minas the Second, the sixty-first
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. The parents of this holy man made him marry a wife
when he was young, against his will, but he did not wish to transgress the command of his
parents, and he fulfilled all the duty of marriage according to the Law of the Church, and
the whole of this matter was to him as a dream. When they brought him with his wife into
the marriage-chamber, he sat down and talked to her, saying, “O my sister, what shall it
profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul? The world passeth away
and the lust thereof passeth away, but, as it is written, ‘He who doeth the Will of God shall
endure for ever.’ Come now, let us make a covenant of God, and let us preserve our
bodies and our virginity in purity.” And his wife accepted his words and she agreed with
143

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him that they should keep their bodies in purity. Then he left her and went to the desert of
Scete, and he became a monk in the monastery of Abba Macarius, and he dwelt there for
many years as an ascetic and fighter. When the archbishop his predecessor died, they took
Abba Minas against his will, and made him archbishop; and he sat on the throne of Mark
the evangelist for eighteen years, and he protected his flock rightly and justly and he died
in peace. Salutation to Minas the Second who renounced the world and regarded it as a
shadow and as a thirst during which a man drinketh as in a dream.
Salutation to thee, Victor, in whose admonitions the children rejoiced. [Wanting in the
Bodleian MS.]
And on this day beginneth the preaching of the fasting service of Soma Gena, for the birth
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which the Jacobite Christians established.
Salutation to the House of Pachomus, which was consecrated by the holy, father Timothy.
[Wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also died the holy Maccabaeus of Kasbar, who fought until he fed with his
body the birds of heaven.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 16
(November 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day was consecrated the church of the blessed Saint ‘Abunafer, the dweller in the
desert, [which is built] outside the city of Mesr (Cairo). Salutation to the consecration of
thy house outside the city of Mesr (Cairo), which thou protect from heat and from cold by
the hair of thy head and thy flowing beard.
And on this day also died the holy father, Abba John, the forty-eighth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This father was from the country of Cyprus, and he was exceedingly
rich, and he lived in the city of Alexandria; and his father was governor of the city and he
had married a wife and begotten children. After this his wife died and his children, and
forthwith he gave all his possessions to the poor and needy. And he became a monk and
he fought strenuously and became an ascetic, and he multiplied greatly his ascetic labors.
And he pleased God by his works, and his faith, and the beauty of his singing, and his
righteousness, and his excellence. And all the bishops of the country of Egypt agreed
together, and they took him against his will and they made him Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria, and he took his seat upon the throne of Mark the evangelist. And he read the
Holy Gospel and his light appeared in the manner wherein he fulfilled the duties of his
position and his office, and he worked many miracles and wonders. And he used to give to
the poor and needy each day regularly whatsoever they lacked, and because of this Abba
John, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, used to be called “the merciful.” And the Jews
and pagans held him in great reverence, and they feared him and honored him, even as it is
written in the history of his strife; and he shepherded his flock wisely and well, and he
144

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
pleased God, and he died in peace. Salutation to Archbishop Kiri, who was called “John
the Merciful.”
And on this day also Saint Xystus the bishop became a martyr by the hand of Maximus the
governor, who tortured the holy man with severe tortures and then cut off his head with the
sword. And Xystus received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
Salutation to Xystus the martyr.
And on this day also Saint Tatus (Tatia) became a martyr in the city of Rome, under
Alexander the governor. Having had her brought before him he said unto her, “Sacrifice to
my gods”; and she said, “I will only sacrifice to Jesus Christ my God.” And the governor
commanded [his soldiers] to strip off the veil of her face, and when he saw her he marveled
at her beauty. Her eyes were like the stars of the heavens, her figure was like the palm, and
her beauty was like that of the rose; and there was none who could be compared with her at
that time. When the governor saw her his heart was carried away by love for her, and he
said unto her, “Obey me. Offer sacrifice to the great god Apollo, and I will make thee
mistress of the palace.” And Saint Tatus (Tatia) said unto him, “I am the bride of Jesus
Christ, and I will worship none but He. Permit me to go into the shrines of thy gods for I
would see their power”; and the governor took her into the house of his gods. And when
Saint Tatus (Tatia) had gone in she prayed and entreated God to destroy the idols, and
straightway there was an earthquake, and the idols fell down from their thrones, and
Apollo, their greatest idol, fell down and was broken in pieces, and many of the priests of
the temple died. And the foul spirit who was in Apollo cried out, saying, “What hast thou
to do with me, O holy woman of God? Behold thou hast broken in pieces my abode, and
thou hast cast me out from it.” When the emperor saw this he commanded his soldiers to
throw her down on her face and to beat her with whips until the blood flowed from her
body, now her blood was as white as milk, and they beat her until their muscles were tired.
And the angels of God inflicted pains on those who were beating her, but their torturing
affected Saint Tatus (Tatia) in no way. And the emperor also commanded the soldiers to
give her to a famished lion, but when the lion came to her he crouched at her feet and
licked them; and a voice came from heaven, saying, “Rejoice, O pure one, for I am with
thee.” And when the emperor saw that there was no way of touching her he commanded
the soldiers to cut off her head with the sword, and the soldiers did so, and she finished her
fight. And the Bishop of Rome came by night, and he wrapped her body up in costly
cloths, and laid it in a chest inlaid with gold and silver, and innumerable miracles took
place through her body. Salutation to Tatus (Tatia), perfect within and without, the dust at
whose feet the lion licked.
And on this day also are commemorated Daniel the monk, and the Emperor Honorius.
This Abba Daniel was a fighter in the desert of Scete, in the monastery of Abba Mararius,
and he lived for forty years and a half without tasting bread, or fish, or honey, or oil, for he
ate nothing except herbs and water. And after he had done this for [many] days, a boastful
idea came to him, and he said in his heart, “Who is there among the dwellers in the desert
of Scete that can fast as long as I do?” When God saw the pride of his heart He sent unto
him a shining angel who said unto him, “Why, O Daniel, dost thou boast thyself thus
arrogantly, which is not good? Our Lord Jesus Christ desires not pride but lowliness, and
fear, and trembling.” And Daniel said unto the angel, “Tell me, my lord, if there is anyone
better than myself so that I may go and see him and I will confess to my God that I have
sinned.” And the angel said unto him, “Honorius, Emperor of Rome (Constantinia), is a
145

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
pure and holy man, and a fearer of God, he shall be thy companion in the kingdom of the
heavens.” When Abba Daniel heard this he bowed and knelt down on the ground, and
threw dust on his head, and he asked God to bring him to the City of Rome (Constantinia)
in His wisdom and power and to show him the emperor. And whilst he was praying thus a
cloud came by the command of God and brought him to the gates of Constantinia, and he
found there a servant of the Emperor Honorius. When the servant saw Abba Daniel, he
was blessed by him, and he said unto him, “O my father, what is thy wish? For what hast
thou come hither?” And Abba Daniel said unto him, “If thou art able to lead me to one of
the nobles of the city so that he may take me to the emperor, [do so].” And the servant
said unto him, “If I myself could take thee to the emperor wouldst thou come?” And Abba
Daniel said unto him, “If thou hast power to bring me to him God be blessed.” And the
servant said unto him, “O my father, what wouldst thou do with the sight of an earthly and
mortal emperor? Would it not be better for thee to see the kingdom of the heavens?” And
Abba Daniel said unto him, “If my God had not commanded me I should not have come
hither.” And the servant said unto him, “Wait, O my father, until I buy what my master
requires”; and straightway he bought bread, and salt, and vegetables, and vinegar. And the
servant took him to the place where Honorius was with a fellow monk, whose name was
Eulogius, according to his custom. After Honorius returned from the place of [giving]
judgment, he put on sackcloth and clean raiment and sat down. And the servant leaving
Abba Daniel outside the door went in, and when Honorius saw him he said unto him, “Art
thou mad that thou makest Abba Daniel to stand outside the door?” And Honorius went
out with his companion, and he received Abba Daniel, and bowed down at his feet, and
they saluted each other with greetings of peace, and they went into the chamber and sat
down; and at the ninth hour the servant brought them food to eat, and they rose up and
prayed. Now Abba Daniel was afraid to eat bread lest he should fall ill, and he said unto
Honorius and his companion, “O my lords, murmur not against me because I do not eat
bread; it is not through pride that I refrain but through fear of sickness.” Then they gave
him a few herbs and he ate according to his wont. When they had finished the prayer of
the table Honorius enquired of Abba Daniel about his coming. And Abba Daniel said unto
him, “If thou art able I wish thee to bring me to the Emperor, for I have come [to see him]
at the command of Christ.” And on the following day Honorius put on royal apparel,
which bewitched the sight, and he sat upon his throne, and he made [his servant] bring in
Abba Daniel. And when Daniel saw the emperor he was afraid and trembled, and the
servant seeing his fear took him from there and brought him to his abode. When the
judging was ended Honorius threw off his [royal] apparel, and put on the garb of the monk,
and went back to his dwelling. And when Abba Daniel saw him, he said, “Why didst thou
not take me to the king, so that I might tell him what is in my heart and return to my
place?” And Honorius said unto him, “Why didst thou come?” And Abba Daniel said
unto him, “Thy servant brought me”; and when Honorius heard this he marveled and said
unto him, “I am Honorius whom men call ‘Emperor of the Earth,’ and thou hast seen me
sitting on my transitory throne.” When Abba Daniel heard this he bowed down at his feet,
and adjured him to tell him the story of all his life. And the Emperor Honorius told him
that for forty years he had neither eaten food nor worn raiment which he had not earned by
the labor of his hands, that is to say the weaving of palm fiber, that what was left of his
daily food he gave to the poor, that his food was bread, and herbs, and vinegar and salt,
that he never cursed any man, that he never craved for the goods of any man, and that he
had kept himself a virgin. When Abba Daniel heard this he said unto him, “Forgive me for
boasting myself over thee”; and Abba Daniel departed to his place sorrowfully, and in
146

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
tears. After two months had passed Honorius and his teacher Eulogius agreed together,
and he departed from the palace, and God sent an angel who carried him to Abba Daniel,
and they finished their strife and they both died on the same day; and Eulogius and his
disciple also died on that day. Salutation to Honorius and to Abba Daniel his companion.
Salutation to Eulogius and to his servant who dwell together in heaven.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 17
(November 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the translation of the body of the saint who is honored in all
the ends of the world, John the Mouth of Gold (Chrysostom), Archbishop of the city of
Constantinia (Constantinople). Now Saint John excommunicated the Empress Eudoxia
because of the property of a widow, which she had taken from her by violence. And the
empress made an excuse for herself, saying, “Kings have always been in the habit, if when
they have been going about among estates they have seen any property which they wanted,
of taking it, and giving the owner the value thereof, and I will give this widow the value of
her estate”; now the widow did not wish to part with her estate. For this reason Saint John
excommunicated the Empress Eudoxia, and he forbade her to enter the church, because she
had not obeyed his command and let the property of the widow alone. And Satan came
upon her, and she swelled with pride, and became furiously angry, and she gathered
together to her the bishops whom Saint John had excommunicated because of their evil
works and wicked faith. And they conspired together against him, and the empress drove
him into exile to the island of the mountains ‘Adrakes. After a few years (days?) he
returned to his office, and then the bishops gathered together and drove him into exile in
the country of Armenia; and from there [he went] to a far city in the desert where he died.
When Theodosius the Less, the son of Arcadius, reigned, he sent messengers and had the
body of Saint John the Mouth of Gold (Chrysostom) brought to the city of Constantinia
with great honor, and much singing, and music, five and thirty years after he was exiled,
and it arrived on the twenty-second day of the month Genbot (May-June), according to
what is said in the second volume of the Coptic Synopsis, and on the twenty-second day of
the month Yakatit (Feb-March), according to the Greek books. And it is said that they laid
the body in a coffer of afras stone, that is to say, marble, in the sanctuary, and great signs
and wonders were made manifest through his body. Salutation to the translation of thy
body, O John the Mouth of Gold (Chrysostom).
Now the Book of the Exposition of Alexandria, and the Exposition which Abba John,
Bishop of the city of Keft, wrote, and the Exposition of the Melchites agree together in
stating that the death of John the Mouth of Gold (Chrysostom) took place on the
seventeenth day of the month Khedar. The Exposition of the Jacobites saith that he died
on the fourteenth day of the month Elul, that is to say, the seventeenth day of the month of
Maskaram, and that, because of the festival of the Cross they changed it to the seventeenth
day of Khedar. The old books record that his death took place on the twelfth day of the
month Genbot, but I think that it was the carrying of his body up to the city of Constantinia
147

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
which took place on that day, and behold it is [here] written on the seventeenth day of the
month of Khedar.
And on this day also are commemorated that blessed Abraham and his wife Harik, and the
righteous men [who suffered martyrdom in the desert of] Wasif, and Abba Sinoda the
abbot. Salutation to Abraham, and his wife Harik, and their child Kedus ‘Amlak.
Salutation to the martyrs of the desert of Wasif. Salutation to Abba Sinoda the abbot.
[And on this day is commemorated Walatta Petros the Ethiopian woman.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 18
(November 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy virgins Atrasis and Yona became martyrs. This Saint Atrasis was the
daughter of King Iskandrianus who worshipped idols; and he made her a palace, and he
established her therein by herself so that she might never see a man. And she used to think
about the end of this world, and she asked God by day and by night to teach her the path of
righteousness and integrity. And she saw a vision one night and it was as if one said unto
her, “Send to the virgin Yona, the daughter of Philaspheron and she shall teach thee the
way of God.” When she awoke from her dream her soul rejoiced and she sent a message
to the virgin Yona who made haste to come unto her; and Atrasis embraced her, and bowed
down at her feet, and she entreated her to teach her and make manifest to her the path of
God. And Yona the virgin told her the reason why the Son of God became a man, and she
began to tell her [the history of the world] from the time when God created our father
Adam, and how He expelled him from the Garden; and she told her about the days of
Noah, and how the water of the Flood came and destroyed all mankind, and how only eight
men were left [alive], and how the earth was renewed once more, and how men
worshipped idols, and how God appeared to our father Abraham, and how the Israelites
went out from Egypt, and how the prophets proclaimed the coming of the Son of God, and
how Satan was master of the world through the worship of idols, and how the Son of God
came down from heaven, and took flesh of Mary so that He might save the children of men
from the dominion of Satan. And Yona the virgin told her and made her to know about
heavenly grace, and the kingdom which is for ever, which God gives unto those who labor
for His holy Name’s sake. When Atrasis the virgin heard the words of Yona she rejoiced
exceedingly; and the words of Yona the virgin were unto her sweeter than honey and
sugar, and straightway she believed on God. And the two virgins lived together and they
fasted and they prayed by day and by night; and the king, the father of Atrasis, knew
nothing of this matter. One day they saw our Lord Jesus Christ, and His mother Mary the
pure and holy Virgin, and she took the two virgins and brought them to her Son as an
offering, and He blessed them. And the king, the father of Atrasis, departed to fight a
battle, and when he came back he came to his daughter and said unto her, “Come, my
daughter, cast incense to the god Apollo before thou comest to thy marriage (?).” And
Atrasis the virgin said unto her father, “Why dost thou forsake the God of heaven and
worship foul idols? Turn, O my father, to the God Who created thee and in Whose hand is
148

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
thy soul and body.” When the king her father heard these words, the like of which he had
never heard from her before, he marveled, and asked what had come to his daughter and
what had changed her mind. And [his servants] told him, “It is Yona the virgin, the
daughter of Philaspheron, who hath corrupted thy daughter’s heart.” And the king
commanded [his soldiers] to burn them in the fire, and they dragged them out arrayed, as
they were in costly raiment wherein gold and silver were woven in cunning devices, and
they did not strip them naked because they were daughters of kings. And there were many
of their slaves, and their handmaidens, both small and great, who wept for them, and the
men of the city also wept and were sorry for those virgins, and they begged them to submit
to the king so that he might not kill them; but they would not turn from their good counsel,
and their divine love. And straightway the soldiers dug pits in the ground and they lighted
fires therein and the flames thereof rose to a great height. And the two virgins took each
other’s hand and they cast themselves into the fire, and the people saw them standing up in
the fire with their faces turned towards the east, and they were praying, and after that they
died. Now the fire was unto them as cool water. And certain believing men took away
their bodies, and their countenances were unchanged, and their apparel was unscorched,
and the fire had not touched the hair of their head; and they laid them in a good place with
great honor until the end of the days of persecution. And they built a fine church and laid
their bodies therein, and great signs and wonders were wrought there through them.
Salutation to the virgins Atrasis and Yona who died in the fire holding each other’s hand.
And on this day also died Philip the apostle, one of the Twelve Apostles. Now the lot fell
upon this apostle to go to the country of ‘Afrakya (Phrygia), and all the region round
about, and he preached to the people thereof the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, our God
and Redeemer; and he worked miracles there which astonished the hearts [of men]. And
when Peter and Philip drew nigh to the city a certain man in whom was an evil spirit
received them, and he cried out, saying, “O Apostles of Christ, I will not let you go into the
city.” And Peter knew that [he was possessed of] a spirit of devils, and then and there he
rebuked him, and Satan went out of him, and the man was healed and he followed the
apostles into the city. Now there was above the gate of the city an exceedingly high pillar,
and when they came to that gate Peter entreated God, saying, “I beseech Thee, O my Lord
Jesus Christ, that this gate, and this high pillar and the things which are on it may fall down
upon the earth in such a manner that the hand of a man may touch them.” And at that
moment the gate, and the pillar, and the things, which were on it, fell down upon the earth,
and they appeared to be like the face of the earth. And Peter said unto the man from whom
the foul spirit had gone forth, “Go up and cry out,” and he cried out, saying, “Apostle of
Christ, I will cry out as thou commandest me.” And similarly he commanded him to speak
with his mouth so that awe might fall upon the men of that city. And that man went up
from the ground upon the pillar which had stood over the gate, and Peter said unto him, “In
the Name of my Lord Jesus Christ let it be raised up,” and at that very moment the gate
raised itself up, and the pillar which was upon it, and the doors resumed the place which
they had formerly. And the man cried out with a loud voice, saying, “O men who live in
this city, assemble ye in the place where are the Apostles of Christ, our Lord, that they may
bless you and may entreat Him to forgive you your sins.” And whilst the man was
standing upon the top of the pillar and saying these words, there was an earthquake and
lightning, and the men of the city were frightened, and they feared exceedingly, and they
went into the houses, and caverns, and islands (sic), and the lightning pursued them
wherever they went; and many men, and women also, died of fright at the noise of the
thunder and the lightening. And because of this groups of people came to the apostles, and
149

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
they looked at them, their hands being stretched out, and they made supplication to God,
and they fell on the ground and bowed low before them, saying, “O servants of God, we
beseech thee to have mercy upon us.” And the apostles made entreaty to God on their
behalf, and the thunder ceased and there was no more lightning; and they all believed on
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the apostles brought them to the knowledge of God, and after
this they made them to enter the True Faith. And [Philip] went outside the city and turned
the people to the knowledge of God, but those who did not believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ took counsel together against Philip so that they might seize him and kill him. Now
they enjoyed the favor of the king, and he would not allow them to enter into their alien
city. When Philip came to them they rose up against him, and seized him, and shut him up
in prison. And he used to laugh before them, and say unto them, “Why do ye go away
from everlasting life, and why do ye not think about the salvation of your souls?” And
they rose up against him, and seized him, and shut him up in prison; and they tortured him
with severe tortures, and they suspended him head downwards, and he delivered up his
soul whilst still under torture. And when they wanted to burn his body in the fire, an angel
of God snatched it out of their hands whilst they stood looking at him, and he carried it to a
place outside the city of Jerusalem. And when they saw this great miracle they all cried
out with a loud voice, saying, “One is the Lord God of Saint Philip the apostle.” And they
were sorry and repented that they had tortured him, and they entreated God by day and by
night until the body of Saint Philip returned. And when they saw it they rejoiced
exceedingly, and they came back to the Faith of our Lord Christ, and through the body of
Philip God made manifest signs and miracles. Salutation to Philip and Eleutherus.
And on this day also Eleutherus, and his mother Entia, who belonged to a noble family of
the city of Rome, became martyrs. This holy man was brought up by a God-fearing bishop
whose name was Anicetus. When he was sixteen years of age he was made a deacon,
when he was eighteen he was made a priest, and at the age of twenty years he was made
bishop of the country of ‘Elerikos. In those days Andrianus the emperor came to the city
of Rome, and when he heard about Eleutherus he commanded Pilkes to bring him to him;
and Pilkes found him in the church teaching the Word of God. When Pilkes heard the
Faith of Eleutherus, he believed and was baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ. When he
had brought Eleutherus to Andrianus the emperor, he said unto him, “Offer sacrifice to the
gods. Thou art a free man, why dost thou worship a man who was crucified?” And
Eleutherus said, “My freedom is the Cross of Jesus Christ, Who is the Creator of the
heavens and of the earth.” When the emperor heard this he commanded [his soldiers] to
throw him into a red-hot oven and to shut him in; and they did so, and straightway the fiery
oven was cooled; and [they threw him on the wheel, and] the wheel was broken. When the
emperor saw this he marveled greatly, and not knowing what to do he commanded the
soldiers to throw him into prison. And a raven brought him food from the Garden (i.e.
Paradise) and he ate and was satisfied. And when Illyricus (?) the governor saw him, he
believed in the God of Saint Eleutherus, and they cut off his head with a sword. And
Andrianus commanded his soldiers to bring small horses, and to harness them to a chariot,
and they tied Eleutherus to the middle of the chariot, and they dragged him about until is
limbs were cut to pieces. And straightway an angel of God came down and released him
from his fetters, and he took him into a high place, and he sat down with the wild beasts
glorifying God. And straightway Andrianus ordered his soldiers to hunt down the wild
beasts that were in the mountain in which they had found Eleutherus, and they took
Eleutherus to Andrianus the emperor. When they had brought him to him the emperor
commanded them to give him to the lions, and when the lions came they licked the
150

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
moisture from his face and feet; and all the men of Rome wondered. Now the lions had
slain fifty hundred pagans. When the emperor saw this he was filled with wrath, and he
commanded two soldiers to spear him [and they did so]. And his mother Entia also--after
they had tortured her greatly, they speared her with him, and whilst she was embracing the
neck of her son they delivered up their souls to God. Salutation to Eleutherus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 19
(November 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the consecration of the church of Saint Sergius and Saint Bacchus
in the city of Rusafa. Now, Saint Sergius having been martyred in the city of Rusafa
certain believing men took his body and prepared it for burial [and kept it] with them, and
they lighted lamps before it; and it remained hidden with them until the end of the days of
persecution when they brought it out and built a fine church for it. And there gathered
together about him in the church fifteen bishops, and they consecrated it on this day, and
many signs and wonders took place through it. And when they removed his body and laid
it in the church there flowed forth from it scented unguent, the perfume whereof was
exceedingly sweet, and it healed all the sick folk who received some of it in faith and in
True Faith; and to this day a sweet odor floweth forth from his body. Salutation to the
bishops who consecrated the shrine of Sergius.
And on this day also is the beginning of the fasting service of the birth of our Lord and
Redeemer Jesus Christ for all the Christians of Rome and ‘Afrangi (Europe?), and Syria
and Armenia, with the exception of the men of Egypt and Ethiopia and Noba.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Bartholomew the apostle, one of the Twelve
Apostles. And his preaching took place in the country of Al-Khargah (the Great Oasis),
and at length he turned many to the knowledge of God. His martyrdom took place on the
first day of Maskaram. Salutation to the fighting apostle who was tied up in a hair sack
and cast into the sea.
And on this day also became martyrs Saints Theophilus, and his wife Patricia, and their
son Damalis. This holy man was brought up in the fear of God and in the service of Christ.
And certain men went and told ‘Antihipotos, the governor, that he was a Christian, and the
governor, who was in the temple of Jupiter, ordered his soldiers to bring him to him.
When they had brought him the governor said unto him, “Whence art thou? What is thy
faith?” And Theophilus said unto him, “I am a Christian and I believe on my Lord Jesus
Christ.” And the governor said unto him, “Offer sacrifice to the gods so that thou mayest
not die an evil death”; and Theophilus said unto him, “I will only sacrifice to my Lord
Jesus Christ.” And the governor commanded his soldiers to hang him up and to scrape his
body until his bowels appeared, [and they did so], but he was protected and did not suffer.
Then the governor ordered them to light a fire and to cast him into it, [and they did so], but
when the saint had prayed in the midst of the fire, the fire was scattered and the saint came
forth from it untouched thereby. And the governor seeing this ordered them to cast him
151

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
into prison and to keep him under very strict restraint so that he might died of hunger, [and
they did so]. Eight days after this his wife Patricia came to him carrying her boy, and she
encouraged him to become a martyr and to die for the Name of Christ. And the governor
went into the prison house to enquire if anyone had given any food to Saint Theophilus.
When he opened the door of the prison house the sweet smell of incense met him, and he
found Saint Theophilus sitting upon a cushion, which had been spread out, and three
angels were with him, and they were eating milk and honey. When the governor saw this
he was terrified and withdrew. On the following day the governor commanded the soldiers
to bring Theophilus to him, and he went, his wife accompanying him. And the governor
said unto him, “Sacrifice to the god Jupiter.” And Theophilus said unto him, “I will only
sacrifice to my Lord Jesus Christ.” And the governor commanded the soldiers to throw
him to the lions, [and they did so], and the lions rushed at him and kissed his feet, but in
doing this by the Will of God they wounded him slightly, and he delivered up his soul to
God. And Saint Patricia took his body and put it into a chest, and the governor ordered his
soldiers to take her into the amphitheatre and to give her to the lions, [and they did so].
When the boy Damalis saw this he laughed, and said, “I believe in the Father and the Son
and the Holy Ghost”; now the child spoke being only five months old, and he was crowned
by the lion. Salutation to Theophilus and his wife Patricia, and Salutation to their son
Damalis, who though ignorant of the names of his father and mother shed his blood for
Christ.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 20
(November 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Anianus, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, the second
from Mark the evangelist. This holy man was a native of Alexandria and his parents were
infidel pagans, and his trade was that of a sandal maker. When Saint Mark the evangelist
and apostle came into the city of Alexandria, by the Will and wisdom of God he struck his
foot against a stone and broke the latchet of his sandals, and he gave the sandal to this
Saint Anianus to sew for him. And when he took the sandal to sew it, he thrust his awl
into it, and it passed right through it and pierced his finger; and he said in the Greek
tongue, “Istaos (Eis Theos),” which being interpreted is “One God.” When Saint Mark the
evangelist heard him mention the Name of God, he took up some dust from the ground and
spat spittle upon it, and laid it upon the finger of Anianus and healed it immediately; and
Anianus marveled at this, and he took Saint Mark and brought him into his house, and he
asked him about his name and Faith, and from what place he had come. Then Saint Mark
began to tell him from the Old and the New Testaments concerning the Godhead of our
Lord Christ, and His wisdom, and His being made man, and His Death and Resurrection,
and the working of miracles in His holy Name. And he illumined the heart of Saint
Anianus, and he believed in the Lord Christ, and the men of his house also, and they were
baptized in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the Divine Grace of the Holy Spirit
came down upon them. And they became devoted hearers of the doctrine of Saint Mark
the apostle, and Anianus learned all the doctrine of the Church, and her ordinances and her
152

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Law. When Saint Mark the apostle wished to go to Pentapolis to preach, he laid his hand
upon the head of Saint Anianus and made him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And
he used to preach to the men thereof, and baptize them secretly, and help the believers and
strengthen them in the True Faith. And he set apart his own house for a church, and it is
said, that this church, which is outside the city of Alexandria on the west, was known to
Saint George the martyr. And this Saint Anianus sat upon the throne of Mark the
evangelist twelve years, and he died in peace. Salutation to Anianus who protected his
flock against the jaws of the ravening wolf, and received the reward of the shepherd in
heaven.
And on this day also took place the consecration of the church of Saint Theodore the
general. Salutation to the consecration of thy church, O Saint Theodore the martyr! Save
me even as thou didst save the son of the Hebrew woman.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 21
(November 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And on this day also died Saint Gregory, the worker of signs and wonders. This holy man
came from the country of Rome, and from his earliest years he was taught philosophy and
the True Faith. He was a true Christian, and he remembered the end of this world, and the
never-ending abidingness of the kingdom of the heavens, and he devoted all his mind to
the salvation of his soul. And the bishop of that city asked him to help him in the work of
his episcopate, but he did not wish for this for he used to flee from the praises of men; after
this he fled to the desert where he fought a good fight. When the bishop of that city died
[the priests] tried to make him bishop, but they could not find him; and when the people
were gathered together, and Gregory, the preacher of Divinity, was with them, a voice
came unto them saying, “Seek for Gregory, the dweller in the desert, and set him over
you.” And they sought for him but found him not, and they continued [to seek for him] for
many days. And whilst they were seeking for him in the desert and mountains, he was
nigh unto them though they knew it not. And when they found him not they all with one
accord agreed and took a Book of the Gospels and set it over them, and this Book which
they set over them they named “Gregory, the preacher of Godhead.” And the angel of the
Lord appeared unto this Saint Gregory, and said unto him, “Rise up and get thee gone, for
they have made thee bishop over them; and refuse not this thing, for it is from God.” And
he was unable to resist the Divine command, and he descended from the mountain, and
went to them, and they went forth to meet him with great honor, and they carried out his
enthronement. And God made manifest through him signs and wonders innumerable, and
because of this he was called “Gregory, the worker of signs and miracles,” because of the
multitude of his signs and wonders. Now there was a certain small lake wherein two
brethren used to catch many fish, which they sold for much money, and they disputed
between themselves about the lake, each one saying, “This Lake belongs to me only.”
When they were unable to agree about it they came to Bishop Gregory to make a decision
about that lake for them, and he decided that they should divide the lake between them.
153

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And when they refused to agree together as he commanded them, and they would not do as
the saint told them, but each continued to say, “I will take it for myself,” straightway Saint
Gregory asked God concerning that lake. And the earth swallowed up the lake, and the
water became dry land, and it remains so to this day. And the report of the signs and
wonders, which he used to work, was heard in all the earth; and having finished his good
fight he died in peace [and departed] from this fleeting world and entered into everlasting
joy. Salutation to Gregory whose odor is sweeter then cinnamon, and who dried up a lake
about which two brethren quarreled.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Cosmas, the fifty-first Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. On this holy man came tribulation and much sorrow, and in his days
great tribulation came upon the Christians. And about that time also the King of the
Muslims put them to shame, for he commanded that the Christians and the Jews should not
wear white apparel, and that they should distinguish themselves by wearing apparel the
color of indigo. And in the days of this holy father many signs and wonders appeared, and
among them was the wonder of the figure of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary, which was in
the church of Saint Severus in the desert of Scete; this figure opened itself down on one
side, and from it much blood flowed. And there were many figures [of the Virgin] in the
country of Egypt from the eyes of which tears flowed in abundance, and those who have
understanding and wisdom will know that this took place because of the tribulation, and
trials and sorrow which came upon the bishops and the believers. And after this God gave
good days in the place of those days which were bad. And this father taught the believers
continually, and he strengthened them in the True Faith; and he sat upon the throne of
Mark for seven years and five months. He died on the twenty-first day of the month of
Khedar in the five hundred and seventy-fifth year of the martyrs (A.D. 859), and he was
buried in a cave near Donosor. Salutation to thy upright episcopacy, thou on account of
whose sorrow the figure of the Virgin shed tears.
And on this day also are commemorated the holy martyrs Alphaeus, and Zacchaeus, and
Romanus, and John, and Thomas, and Victor, and Isaac from the city of Eshmunen.
Salutation to you, O ye bright stars of Eshmunen.
And on this day also died Abba John of the city of Asyut. The parents of this holy man
were glassmakers, and when this saint was born they brought him up under good
admonitions and teaching; after he grew up they taught him the craft of the carpenter, and
after a few days, when his father and his mother were dead, he departed to the saints Abba
Isidore and Abba Bayman and adopted the garb of the monk; and he devoted himself so
strenuously to fasting and prayer that his name was heard of in remote monasteries. Then
the angel of the Lord appeared unto him and commanded him to go to his own country and
to teach the people thereof the way of righteousness. Now he never left his cell except to
receive the Offering. And one day two holy old men came to him, Abba Abzel and Abba
Besoy, and before they had come near him he cried out from a distance, saying, “Peace to
your visit, O my fathers,” and he addressed them by their names though he knew them not.
And they marveled greatly. And Saint Sinoda, the pillar of Egypt, used to visit him often
and embrace him. When the wicked pagans attacked the land of Egypt and war broke out,
the Emperor Theodosius sent the governor of Egypt who marched against them. And he
sent Saint John and took his cross, and the saint said unto the governor, “Fear not. Thou
shalt conquer,” and so it came to pass according to his word. And war broke out a second
time against Theodosius, and he sent [to enquire of] Saint John [how it would end, and the
154

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
saint said unto him], “Be not sad. Thou shalt conquer,” and the Emperor Maximianus
conquered them (i.e. the enemy). One day the Emperor Theodosius commanded [his
soldiers] to kill the men of Asyut and to plunder their city because of the great work of
foulness, which they had done. Now the angel of God made Abba John to know this
before the governor arrived. When the men of the city heard of the emperor’s command
they went up the mountain to Abba John [and he said unto them], “Be not sad, for God will
save you.” When the governor arrived, he came into the cell of this holy man John in order
to be blessed by him, and Abba John told the governor everything which the emperor had
commanded; and when the governor heard this he was amazed and he prostrated himself
before his holiness. And the governor had a son who was eighteen years old and who was
possessed by the spirit of a devil, and he asked the holy man to heal him. And the holy
may prayed over some oil and water, and having anointed him therewith he was healed
straightway. Then the saint asked the governor to write to the emperor, and to abandon the
slaughter of the men of Asyut, and the governor wrote a letter to him and gave it to Abba
John. And having taken the letter and gone into his cell, he prayed, and a cloud of light
came and it took up Abba John and brought him to the emperor, and when the emperor had
a table prepared Saint John threw the letter upon it. And the emperor took it and read it,
and he found that it was the letter, which the governor had written for Father John. And
having lifted up his eyes he saw a cloud of light above him, and he was terrified. Then he
wrote a letter to the governor in his own handwriting and under his own secret sign,
[telling him] to abandon the destruction of the city through the prayer of Abba John. And
the emperor threw his letter on the cloud, and those who were assembled there saw a hand
receive it, and it went inside the cloud; and during that night the saint returned to the
mountain; and on the following day he gave the letter with the emperor’s seal upon it to the
governor. When the governor saw it he was amazed, and he praised God for the saving of
the city, and he departed to his own country. And the fame of Saint John being noised
abroad a certain noble lady, a kinswoman of the emperor, went to him to be healed of her
disease, and by his prayer she was healed. Then the Emperor Theodosius died and the
wicked Marcian reigned, and he brought tribulation upon our father Dioscurus. And Abba
John sent him a letter abusing him and cursing him because he had changed the Faith, and
after a few days God killed him. When Abba John was one hundred and twenty-five years
old he knew that his [time of] rest had come, and as he was praying to God he fell forward
on his face on the ground, and delivered up his soul into the hand of his Creator. And
innumerable signs and wonders appeared at his grave. Salutation to John who was arrayed
in holiness.
And on this day took place the translation of the body of Saint Deborah, who is also called
“Tchebare,” of the city of Dalbat; her story is written in the book of her strife.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

155

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
HEDAR 22
(December 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became martyrs Cosmas, and Damianus, and the brethren ‘Antimos
(Arithimus), and Londius (Leontius), and Abranius, and their mother Theodata. These
saints were natives of the city of Deyoma, in the country of Arabia, and came from the
temple, which was built in the Name of the Son of God. Their mother was a woman who
feared God, and she was compassionate and gave large gifts to the pilgrims. After the
death of their father this widow brought them up and taught them the fear of God. Now
Cosmas and Damianus having learned practical philosophy (i.e. medicine) used to heal all
those who were sick without fees and without gifts, and especially those who were poor;
and their three brothers departed to the desert and became monks. Now Diocletian denied
Christ because of [the son of] the King of Kuez (Khuzistan), whom he had committed for
safe keeping to a bishop whose name was Gagyos. Abba Gagyos took an oath to the
Emperor Diocletian that the son of the King of Kuez (Khuzistan?) had died in his house,
and that he had buried him with his own hands, [whereas the bishop had connived at the
prince’s escape]. For this reason Diocletian worshipped foul and brutish idols, and
commanded all the people who were in his kingdom to worship idols. And certain men
accused Cosmas and Damianus of preaching in the Name of Christ in every city, and of
ordering the people not to worship idols. And Diocletian sent letters commanding his
soldiers to bring them to him, and they did so, and they handed them over to Lasius the
governor of the city, who tortured them severely with fire, and beat them cruelly with
whips. Then he asked them questions about their three brothers, and when he knew the
place where they were, he sent men and they brought them and their mother also with
them. Then he commanded the soldiers to torture the five of them on the wheel, and they
did as he commanded. And after this they cast them into a red-hot fiery furnace, and they
remained therein for three days and three nights and were unharmed. And they also cast
them into the blazing furnace of the baths, and burned them upon [a red-hot] iron bed, but
in spite of all these tortures they were not able to overcome them, and God raised them up
whole and unharmed. When the governor was weary of torturing them, he handed them
over to the emperor who also tortured them cruelly. And their mother encouraged them to
endure, and she comforted them and she cursed the emperor to his face and his filthy idols.
And straightway the emperor commanded the soldiers to cut off her head with the sword,
and they cut off her head, and she received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. And her body was cast out on the earth and no man dared to bury it. Then
Cosmas cried out, saying, “O men of this city, is there not among you one man who hath in
him sufficient mercy to hide the body of this poor old widow and bury it?” And
straightway Victor, the son of Romanus, came, and he was bold enough to take her body
and prepare it for the grave and bury it. When the emperor heard that Victor had buried
her body he was wroth and he commanded his soldiers to drive him into exile in the land
of Egypt where he received the crown of martyrdom. And as concerning Cosmas and
Damianus and their brethren the emperor commanded his soldiers to cut off their heads
with the sword, [and they did so], and they received crowns of martyrdom and life
everlasting in the kingdom of the heavens. After the days of persecution were ended a
church was built for them, and God made manifest many signs and wonders [through their
bodies]. Salutation to the children of Theodata, who are to be praised.
156

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also became martyrs two hundred and ninety-two men, and nine and forty
women who were companions of Saint Cosmas. Salutation to these martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 23
(December 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great Saint Cornelius. This holy man was the captain of one hundred
men in Caesarea of Palestine and he worshipped the stars. And when he heard the
preaching of the apostles and saw the signs and wonders which God wrought by their
hands, not one of which other men could do, and not one of which the gods whom they
worshipped could do, his heart fell into despair and doubt concerning the gods whom he
worshipped. And straightway he abandoned the worship of idols, and he fasted and he
prayed by day and by night. And when he prayed he said also, “O God, since I am
terrified at Thy knowledge, have mercy upon me, and guide me into Thy way.” And he
gave alms to the poor continually, and love towards all men was in his heart, and God had
compassion upon him, and sent to him an angel who comforted him and told him that his
prayers and his alms had ascended before God and had been accepted by Him. And the
angel of the Lord commanded him to send to the city of Joppa, and to summon Peter the
Apostle from the house of Simon the sewer, so that he might have mercy upon him and
show him the way of God; and he sent and brought him. And when Peter the Apostle
came to him Cornelius bowed down before him at his feet, and Peter the Apostle raised
him up, and said unto him, “I am a man even as thou art.” And Peter found with him many
of the people, and he instructed them and said unto them, “The Law of the Torah
(Pentateuch) prohibiteth us from mingling with the uncircumcised, but God hath shown me
in a vision and hath made me to know that it is not desirable for me to say who I am among
men and that any man is unclean. For this reason I came to you when ye called me; what
do ye want?” And Cornelius answered and said unto him, “Three days ago I was praying
at the time of the ninth hour, and behold a man stood before me in white apparel, and he
shone brightly. And he commanded me to call thee and behold thou hast come and we are
all before thee to listen to whatsoever thou commandest, and what thou shalt command us
to do from God.” And Peter the Apostle opened his mouth, and told him about Christ, and
he informed him concerning the mystery of the working of His wisdom, and His being
made man, and His Crucifixion and His Resurrection, and His Ascension into heaven, and
the working of miracles in His Name. And Cornelius believed on our Lord Jesus Christ,
and all his men, and his slaves, and many of the people who were with him, and they were
baptized in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. And straightway the
Holy Spirit descended upon them, according to the testimony concerning this matter in the
Book of the Acts of the Apostles. Then Cornelius abandoned his business and rank in this
world, and Peter gave him the position of a servant of Christ, and appointed him Bishop of
the city of Alexandria. And Cornelius went there and preached in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and he showed their error to those who worshipped idols, and he illumined
their hearts with the knowledge of God, and he strengthened their hearts by working signs
and miracles before them. And having baptized Demetrius, the governor, he baptized all
157

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the men of the city; and he died in peace and received a crown like the apostles who
preached. Salutation to Cornelius, one of the Seventy-two disciples.
And on this day also died Abadiah the prophet, whose name being interpreted is “servant
of God,” and “he gives thanks to God.” This righteous man was a native of the city of
Susem (Shechem) in the district of Bet-Kherum (Beth-Ephraim). He was the disciple of
Elijah the prophet, and he endured many trials, which came upon him, and he was saved
from them (?) by patient endurance. He was the captain of the third fifty whom Elijah the
prophet spared, and he went down and departed with him to Ahaz the king. After this he
forsook the service of the king in the country and prophesied; and when he died he was
buried with his fathers in peace. Salutation to Obadiah who was clothed with the spirit of
knowledge.
And on this day also was consecrated the church of Marina. [This paragraph is wanting in
the Bodleian MS].
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 24
(December 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the festival of the Four and Twenty Priests of heaven, who
are round about the throne of God, who are priests indeed, and who are beings of the spirit
and have no bodies. They are exalted above all the saints and the spiritual hosts. They are
saints with God and they make intercession on behalf of the race of men, and they bring
unto Him the prayers of the saints like incense in the censers, which they have, in their
hands. And alms and oblations cannot ascend to God except through them even as Saint
John the evangelist says in the Vision of the Apocalypse, “I saw the place of Four and
Twenty elders round about Him, and they were sitting on four and twenty thrones; and on
their heads were four and twenty crowns, and in their hands were four and twenty censers
containing sweet-smelling incense, which is the prayers of the saints who dwell upon earth,
and which they make to rise up before God, the Sustainer of the Universe.” And he also
says, “And I heard Four Beasts praising and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord [God] of
Hosts, the heavens and the earth are filled full of the holiness of Thy glory. And
straightway the four and twenty priests of heaven fell down with their faces to the ground,
and they took off their crowns, and they said unto Him, Glory, and honor, and thanks are
fitting for Thee. And when a command went forth from God they fell down again with
their faces to the ground, saying, Glory, and power, and judgment, and righteousness
belong to our God” (Rev. iv and v). And because the doctors of the Church have found
statements about these Four and Twenty Priests of heaven in the Holy Scriptures, and have
seen stories told of them by the Apostles and in their Canon, saying that they are nigh unto
God, they have ordered and ruled, saying, “The name of him that celebrates their
commemoration shall be revealed upon earth. And they shall entreat God on his behalf to
forgive him all his sins.” Therefore the doctors of the Church tell the people to honor the
158

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
festival of the commemoration of the Four and Twenty Priests of heaven. Salutation to
you, O priests of the Law.
And on this day Azkir, the priest of Nagran, and eight and thirty men who were with him
became martyrs in the days of the kingdom of Sarabhel, the King of Hamir. And he
commanded his soldiers to bring ‘Azkir to him, and they brought him into the prison house
and shut the door on him, and he commanded the keepers of the prison that no man was to
be taken to him. And when Saint ‘Azkir had prayed, the doors of the prison house were
opened, and fifty men came in, and he made a cistern of water there, and he baptized them
therein in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. When Sarabhel the
king heard this he commanded his soldiers to bring ‘Azkir out of the prison house and to
take him to another place; and the holy man met a man whose name was Cyriacus, who
said unto him, “Good news for thee, O ‘Azkir; they are taking thee to martyrdom.” When
the king’s guards heard this they bound Cyriacus with ‘Azkir in fetters. And on the road
they met two men, and they said unto him, “Baptize us for Christ’s sake”; and ‘Azkir
prayed to God, and water sprang up in the desert, and he baptized the two men and
Cyriacus. When they reached the desert the guards and their beasts lacked water, and they
besought Saint ‘Azkir to entreat God on their behalf because they were short of water.
And ‘Azkir prayed to God and straightway a cloud came and poured down rain into the
waterholes to the depth of the hand, and seven hundred men and their beasts drank of that
water and were satisfied. And they brought ‘Azkir to the King of Hamir, and he said unto
him, “What is this new doctrine which thou hast brought into my country?” And Saint
‘Azkir said unto him, “It is not a new doctrine, but one which the prophets have preached
in the Book of the Law, and it hath been heard that the King of the Jews was crucified in
the Christian Faith.” And one of the Rabbanat rose up and said unto the king, “O my lord,
command [thy soldiers] to take him into the city, and let them hang him upon a tree, and
burn him alive”; and the king commanded according to his words. And when they had
brought ‘Azkir to the city of Nagran they hung him upon a tree and lighted a fire [under
him]. And when Saint ‘Azkir had prayed, his fetters were loosed and he went forth alive
from the fire. And the Jews said also, “Come, let us stone him”; and the greater number of
the Jews killed him by stoning, and the rest took swords and cut off his head. Thus Saint
‘Azkir finished his martyrdom and departed to everlasting life. Salutation to ‘Azkir.
And on this day also are commemorated Claudius, and Gayyos, and Artyo, and Dioscurus
the martyr, who died on this day.
And on this day also died Abba Yosef (Joseph) of the city of Sana. The parents of this
holy man were rich in faith, and they had no son except Yosef (Joseph); and they brought
him up very carefully and piously, and they taught him the Books of the Church. Now his
form and appearance resembled those of Joseph, the son of Jacob. When he had grown up
there entered into his heart the remembrance of death and the transitoriness of the world,
and he went into a monastery and became a monk, and a fighter in the spirit; he devoted
himself to fasting and to prayer, and he shut himself in his cell, and never went out except
on the day of the Sabbath, at the time of the Offering. And the report of him was noised
abroad, and the men of Adyam came to him to receive his blessing. And his father and his
mother had no news of him, and they continued to make supplication to God that He would
enable them to find him; and when they heard the report of him they went to him so that he
might pray for the discovery of their son. When they came to him he knew them, but they
did not know him, and after the men had removed themselves he made himself known unto
159

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them, and commanded them to tell no man; and he comforted them and sent them away in
peace. And God bestowed upon him the power to work signs and wonders, and at length
Satan was envious of him. And he went to the governor of the city and told him that this
holy man had much money, and the governor sent soldiers who bound the holy man in
fetters and brought him to the prison house. On the following day when they looked for
him they found the fetters thrown about on the ground; and the governor was terrified and
bowed down at his feet and did reverence to him and sent him into his own house. After
much strenuous fighting he died in peace, and signs and wonders, which were
innumerable, appeared at his grave.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 25
(December 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became a martyr Philopator (which is being interpreted “lover of the Father”)
Mercurius, and this name also being interpreted is “servant of Jesus Christ.” This holy
man was a native of the city of ‘Asletes, which was also the city of his father, and his
grandfather who were born therein, and he was brought up in the city of Rome. Now the
occupation of his father, and grandfather, and his kinsmen was that of hunters of wild
beasts. One day they went out hunting, according to their custom, and they found two men
with the faces of dogs, and they ate his grandfather, and they also wanted to eat his father,
but the angel of the Lord prevented them from doing so. And the angel said unto them,
“Touch him not, for from him shall go forth good fruit.” Then the angel of the Lord
surrounded them with fire, and being in tribulation, the two Dog-faces came to the father
of Saint Mercurius, and they bowed low before him. And straightway God changed their
[savage] nature to one of gentleness, and they became like sheep and went with him to the
city. And after he had begotten the holy man Mercurius, and called his name “Philopator,”
the Dog-faces lived with them for many days, and then they became Christians; now the
ancestors of the holy man had been in days of old pagans. And when they received the gift
of Christian baptism, they called the father of the holy man “Noah,” and his mother
“Tabot,” and Philopator “Mercurius.” And the Dog-faces, according to what the angel of
the Lord said unto them when he appeared unto them, were in subjection to the holy man
Mercurius, and his father. And when the king heard the story of the Dog-faces and how
God had changed their savage natures, [he ordered his soldiers to bring in wild beasts]
before the king, and the Dog-faces destroyed all the wild beasts, which the king brought
before them. When the king saw this he was afraid of them exceedingly, and he asked the
father of Saint Mercurius to entreat God to remove from them their savage nature, and to
make them to possess the nature of men; and he asked God, and God changed their nature
and they became like men. Then the king took the holy father Mercurius and appointed
him governor and captain of the army, and these Dog-faces were subject unto him, and all
the people were afraid of them. After this a certain wicked king rose up and he wished to
make war upon another king, and the king sent his soldiers to entice those Dog-faces and
to bring them to him. And that wicked king, who wished to make war on the king of the
city wherein the father of Saint Mercurius lived, enticed them. And straightway he was
160

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
angry at the Dog-faces, and he punished one of them, who became a martyr thereby, and
the other fled. When the father of Saint Mercurius returned to the city he sought for his
son and his mother and found them not. Now the king, having heard that the father of
Saint Mercurius was killed in battle, decided to take the mother of Saint Mercurius and
marry her. And one of the soldiers of the king knowing what the king intended to do, went
and told the mother of Saint Mercurius what the king had decided concerning her. When
she heard this she asked him to take [her] out secretly, and she went out with her son the
blessed Mercurius. And his father having sought for his wife and his son, and found them
not, knew not in the least what had become of them. And the king was afraid because he
thought that the Dog-faces lived with him, and that he would become angry and would turn
them loose, and they would destroy all the city. And the king commanded his servants not
to tell him that he intended to marry his wife. After this war broke out against the king,
and the father of Saint Mercurius went out to fight, and the king took him prisoner. Now
by the Will of God the king of Rome was a Christian. And when he knew that the father of
Saint Mercurius was a Christian, he spared him and did not kill him, and he made him
governor of all the city of the Mardosaweyan. And by the Will of God Saint Mercurius
and his mother were in the city of Rome, and when his father came into the church the
mother of Saint Mercurius saw him and knew that he was her husband. One day when
they were sitting in the guest house the father of Mercurius and his soldiers rode out, and
the mother of the blessed Mercurius dressed her son in the fine raiment which he used to
wear in the royal city, and commanded him to go and mount the horse of the governor, that
is to say of his father. And having mounted the governor’s horse, the soldiers seized him
and brought him before the governor, that is to say his father, who did not know that he
was his son, and he was angry with him. And the mother of Mercurius came to her
husband, now he did not know that she was his wife, and she said unto him, “We are
strangers, and when I knew that thou was a stranger I thought that my son might be with
thee”; and when he asked her questions and enquired concerning her journey she told him
that she was his wife. And straightway he knew her and he knew his son Mercurius, and
he placed [him] in the church, and they lived there together. When the father and mother
of Saint Mercurius died, the king took him and made him governor of the city of the
Mardosaweyan in his father’s stead; and the one Dog-face that had remained with him up
to the time he was appointed governor, used to go forth with Mercurius in battle. When
they wanted to fight God used to restore to the Dog-face his original savage nature, and
there was none who could stand before him. And there were given to this Saint Mercurius
power, and great strength, and he was more renowned and more exalted than all the other
officers of the kingdom. Now the Emperor of Rome in those days was called Decius and
he worshipped idols. And his enemies the Barbarians rose up against him, and he
assembled his armies and went forth to fight against them; and they were an many as the
sand of the sea, and the emperor was dismayed and was afraid. And Saint Mercurius said
unto him, “Fear not, for God shall assuredly destroy our enemies and bring them into our
hand.” Now Mercurius saw before him in the battle the angel of the Lord, and he had a
drawn sword in his hand, and he said unto them, “Conquer and fear not, O Mercurius.”
And after this a shining man in white apparel appeared unto him, and he had in his hand a
drawn sword, which he gave to Mercurius, saying, “When thou hast overcome thine
enemies remember the Lord thy God.” And straightway Mercurius conquered his enemies
and returned in great joy. Then the angel of the Lord appeared, and said unto him, “Why
hast thou forgotten and hast not remembered the Name of the Lord thy God?” And the
period of the war being ended the Emperor Decius want to offer up incense to the gods on
161

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
behalf of himself and his army. And Saint Mercurius tarried behind, and did not go forth
with the emperor to the festival in the temple. And a certain man informed the Emperor
Decius and said unto him, “Saint Mercurius hath not come with thy army, and he hath not
associated himself with the offering of incense to the gods.” And the emperor sent
straightway and had Mercurius brought to him, and he marveled at him, the love for him
having forsaken his heart. And the emperor said unto him, “Why hast thou forgotten thy
love for me and hast not come with me to offer incense to the gods?” And straightway
Saint Mercurius cast his girdle and his military attire down before the Emperor Decius, and
he said unto him, “I will not deny my Lord Jesus Christ, and I will not bow down to filthy
idols.” And when the Emperor Decius heard this he was exceedingly wroth, and he
commanded his soldiers to beat him with rods made of green palm wood, and with ox-hide
whips; and they did as the emperor commanded. And straightway the emperor was afraid
lest the people of the city should rise up against him, and he bound him in irons and sent
him to Caesarea in Cappadocia, and he commanded the soldiers there to torture him
severely and to cut off his head with the sword. And they tortured him there, even as the
emperor commanded, and they cut off his head with the sword, and he finished his fight
and received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven. And after he had
received an incorruptible and heavenly crown, and had entered into life everlasting,
churches were built to him in all the ends of the earth, and God made manifest in them
signs and great wonders. And some of his miracles took place when Julian, who denied
our Lord Jesus Christ, was reigning, and in the days of Saint Basil, Bishop of the country
of Caesarea and Cappadocia, even as it is written in one of the works of Saint Basil. Now
Julian the infidel had inflicted very great tribulation upon those who believed in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and he was wroth with Saint Basil and shut him up in prison, and he
multiplied his works against the believers. And Saint Basil gathered together the believers
and he prayed and made entreaty unto God concerning Julian the infidel, and he made
intercession with Saint Mercurius. And God heard his prayer and sent His great and holy
martyr Mercurius, and he came riding upon a horse and he speared Julian the infidel with
his spear in his head, and the emperor died an evil death during the war in the land of
Persia. And when Saint Basil had seen this vision in the picture of Saint Mercurius he
rejoiced with very great joy. And he came into the place wherein was the body of the great
martyr Saint Mercurius, and whilst he was sitting down there and thinking about what he
had seen, straightway the sword and the spear of Saint Mercurius returned to their places,
and from them there dropped so much blood that the whole space beneath the picture of
Saint Mercurius was full of it. And straightway Saint Basil cried out and said, “O martyr
of Christ, to Whom be glory! Hast thou indeed killed Julian the enemy of righteousness?”
And Saint Mercurius in the picture bowed his head before the face of Saint Basil as much
as to say, “Yea, I have killed him.” And Saint Basil multiplied his praises to God, and he
paid Him honor and gave thanks unto Him. And Saint Mercurius wrought very many
signs and wonders. And there was a certain young Muslim who was a son of one of the
officers of the city of Mesr (Cairo), and he was learned in the Law of the Muslims but had
since been baptized with Christian baptism. Then one of the king’s guards seized him, and
he made ready a deep pit and lighted a great fire therein in order that he might burn him in
it; and many men gathered together to see him [burnt]. And that young Muslim drew nigh
unto the martyr whom the royal guard had seized, and he said unto him, “O infidel, why
dost thou run to enter into Sheol? At thine end thou wilt sit in the fire of Gahannam,
because thou dost attribute a Son to God, and dost confess Three Persons. Hearken unto
me and abandon thy blasphemy and thine abominable words.” And the Christian answered
162

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and said unto him, “We Christians are not infidels, but we worship One God, and He is
Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost. The Son is not alien to God His Father, for He is His
Word. Likewise the Holy Spirit, the mystery of our Faith, is wonderful, and is hidden
from you, because your heart is not able to bear Him, and thy heart at this moment is dark
and the light of the Faith illumineth it not. But I can see that after a few days the light shall
draw nigh unto thee, and that the light of Christ shall shine in thine heart. And thou shalt
fight spiritually even as do I for His Name, and thou shalt feel the same pain which I am
now suffering.” When the Muslim heard his words he was exceedingly worth with him,
and he put off his sandals from his feet and buffeted the face and mouth and head of the
Christian and punished him severely, and he said unto him, “What thou sayest shall never
happen to me, O thou infidel.” And the blessed man answered and said unto him, “Needs
must that thou remember what I say unto thee.” And straightway they cut off his head
with the sword, and they threw his body into the pit of fire, and the flames of that fire
mounted upwards and became like a great wall. And the body of the Christian remained in
that fire three days and three nights, and the royal guard watched him by day and by night,
and afterwards they found the body and it was tried like gold and the fire had not touched
it all; and they told this to the king, and he commanded the soldiers to bury the body. And
the young Muslim went into his house being sorrowful, and he neither ate nor drank. And
his father, and mother, and brethren gathered about him, and they said unto him, “What
hath happened to thee? Why dost thou neither eat nor drink?” And he told them what the
martyr of our Lord Jesus Christ had said unto him, and they comforted him, and they said
unto him, “Put aside the word which this erring man spoke unto thee, and dismiss his
prediction from thy heart”; but he was in no wise comforted. And in those days that young
Muslim saw many Muslims, and they were wishing to go to the tomb of their lying
prophet, and he said unto his father, “I should like to go with them”; and his father rejoiced
exceedingly at these words, and he gave him one hundred dinars, and committed him to the
care of his friend, and the young man departed. And as the young man was journeying
with his friend, he saw a vision one night, and it seemed that an aged monk, shining with
light, stood up by his side, and that he said unto him, “Come, follow me that thou mayest
be saved”; and the monk appeared again on the second night, and again on the third night,
and each time he spoke unto him as above. When they had finished their business, having
arrived at their destination, they turned back, and journeyed for a period of six days in the
desert. And as they were traveling by night the young man got down from his camel
because of a bodily need, and his companions left him and departed; and he remained by
himself lost in the desert, and he wept, being afraid lest the wild beasts should eat him.
Then he remembered the church of Saint Mercurius the martyr in the city of Mesr (Cairo),
which was near his father’s house, and he said in his heart, “Every man makes vows to
him, and he fulfils for them everything which they ask him.” And straightway the young
man said, as he wept, “O Mercurius, martyr of Christ, if thou wilt deliver me from the wild
beasts of the desert, and wilt bring me out safe from the desert, I will become a Christian.”
And having said this, behold there came unto him a young man riding upon a horse, and
his appearance was exceedingly goodly, and he was wearing glorious apparel, and his loins
were girt with a girdle of gold, and he stood before him and said unto him, “Whence
comest thou? Why art thou alone and lost in this desert?” And he said unto him, “I got
down [from my camel] because of a bodily need, and they left me and departed.” And the
man on the horse said unto him, “Come, get up behind me on this horse,” and he mounted
the horse with him, and the horse flew through the air, and brought them quickly to the
church of Mercurius the martyr in the city of Mesr (Cairo). And the doors of the church
163

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
flew open to him, and he went in with him on the horse, and he brought him to the
martyrium of the sanctuary, and then disappeared from him and was no more seen. And
the young Muslim stood up in the church frightened, and he said in his heart, “Is this one
of the churches of the Christians?” And he saw the lamps burning before the picture [of
the saint], and this seemed to him to be a dream, and he said, “Am I not still sitting down
in the desert?” And he remained in the sanctuary until the dawn. And the steward of the
church came and found him standing in the sanctuary, and he thought that he was a thief,
and the steward wanted to cry out, but the young Muslim made a sign to him with his
hand, and he said unto him, “Come to me”; and the steward went to him. And the young
man said unto him, “What is this place?” And the steward said unto him, “This is the
church of Saint Mercurius of Mesr (Cairo).” And the young man said unto him, “Is this
the city of Mesr (Cairo)?” And the steward said unto him, “Yea,” and he added, “It seems
that thou art too stupefied to talk to me; but now, O my brother, make me to know what
hath happened to thee.” Then straightway courage returned to the young man, and he said
unto him, “How can I help being stupefied? Seeing that during the past night I was in such
and such a desert. And I have no knowledge whatsoever of how I came here; only God
knows.” When the steward heard the name of that desert he marveled, and said unto the
young man, “Did I not say rightly that thou art stupefied, and that thou dost not know what
thou art saying? The journey from that desert to this place occupies twelve days. Verily
thou art a thief, and it is the might of the blessed martyr Mercurius that hath seized thee
and bound thee here without ropes and fettering irons. This Mercurius the blessed martyr
forsook the glory of this world and thrust it away, and the infidels tortured him with severe
tortures for the Name of Christ, and the martyr died and God received him into His
kingdom, and churches are built in his name everywhere; and in them the saint praises
God, and makes intercession for all men. And for all those who commit themselves to him
in prayer he makes intercession, and he makes manifest miracles.” And the young man
said unto the steward, “What are his form and features like?” and the steward said unto
him, “He resembles thee in stature”; and then he showed him the picture of the saint.
When the young man saw the picture of Saint Mercurius the martyr, he said unto the
steward, “Verily this is the holy man who appeared unto me in the desert, and who bore me
on his horse, and brought me hither. And behold, this is the girdle of gold wherewith I saw
his loins girt.” And he said unto the steward, “Behold, I tell thee that I am a Muslim, I
belong to this city, and the name of my father is Raga, the judge; this miracle is sufficient
to make me become a Christian. And now hide me, and do not reveal my business to any
man. And also bring me a aged priest that he may teach me the way of God, and may
strengthen me in the True Faith, and may bring me . . . ” And the steward put him in a
place by himself, and brought to him a priest, even as he said, and the priest baptized him
with Christian baptism, and brought to him the Books of the Church and the Gospel; and
he remained thus. And about one month after this those men who had journeyed to Mecca
arrived, and all the Muslims who were their kinsmen went out to meet them. And the
judge, the father of the young man, met the friend, who wept bitterly, and he told the judge
how his son had stayed behind in the desert, and how they had left him and come on.
When his father heard this he rent his garments, and his brethren and the young men also
rent their garments, and they sat down and mourned for three days. After this a certain
Muslim woman saw the young man who had become a Christian coming out of the church
of Saint Mercurius. And a Muslim (sic) went and told his father and his brethren [this],
and said unto them, “If it were not that your son died in the desert on the Mecca road, I
should be inclined to say that the young man whom I saw this day by the church of Saint
164

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Mercurius the martyr was he; he was wearing the white apparel which the monks wear, and
in truth he was like your son.” When the father and mother and brethren of the young man
heard this they rose up, and went [there] and found him, and they seized him, and said unto
him, “What hast thou done? And why hast thou put me to shame among the Muslim
nobles?” And he said unto them, “I am a Christian, and I believe in our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of the Living God, the Most High; blessed be His Name!” Immediately he had
said this they punished him very severely, and they cast him into a dark pit, and he
remained there for seven days and seven nights without food and drink, and they poured
urine upon him and cast the filth from their houses on him. And his mother wept over him
day and night, and by reason of her excessive weeping they drove away the young man,
and he departed to the desert of Scete, and he dwelt in the desert of Abba Macarius for a
period of two years, and he fought a strenuous fight, and devoted himself to the ascetic life.
After this a certain monk said unto him, “Would it not be profitable to thee without [delay]
to go to the city of Mesr (Cairo) and proclaim thy Faith openly?” And he rose up and went
to Mesr (Cairo), and his father seized him and took him to King Hakem, who is called
“Governor” (i.e. Khalifah), and he said unto him, “Our son hath forsaken the Muslim faith,
and hath entered the Christian Faith.” And the Khalifah said unto the young man, “Is this
true what they say about thee?” And he told the Khalifah what had happened to him in
Mecca, and how Saint Mercurius had appeared unto him, and how he had seated him with
himself on his horse, and how he had brought him into his shrine in the twinkling of an eye
and had taken him into the church of Mesr (Cairo), and how he had seen the picture of the
saint in the church, and how he knew that it was he who had appeared unto him in the
desert. And when Hakem the Khalifa, the infidel, heard this he spoke many words and he
feared with a great fear. And he said unto the young man, “What dost thou want?” And he
said unto him, “I ask thee to give me authority to build a church in the name of Saint
Mercurius the martyr”; and the Khalifah gave him authority to build a church there in the
name of Michael the archangel, and he built a second church--in the name of Mercurius the
martyr, and great signs and wonders took place therein. And he composed two books, one
on the Grace of God and the gift of the Holy Spirit, and the other on the True Faith. And
he vanquished in debate the wicked, and the pagans, and the Muslims, and he pleased God
and died in peace. Now the name of this young man was “John,” which was given to him
when they baptized him. All this took place through the prayer of Saint Mercurius the
martyr, and the multitude of his miracles. Salutation to Mercurius of Rome, who rode a
black horse.
And on this day also are commemorated Acarius and Romanus.
And on this day died Sabla Wangel, Queen of Ethiopia.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

165

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
HEDAR 26
(December 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Pelarianus (or Balaryanos, i.e. Valerianus) and his sister Tatbusya
became martyrs. This holy man Pelarianus was a native of Rome, and his parents were
infidels. They married him to a maiden, who was the daughter of one of the rich nobles of
Rome, and the name of that maiden was Kilkeya, and she was a Christian and worshipped
the Lord Christ. And when he went to her in the marriage-chamber he loved her dearly,
and as soon as she saw that he loved her dearly she began to reveal to him the Faith of
Christ, and he believe through her, and was baptized with Christian baptism. And when he
shone brightly and became strong in the Divine Grace he taught his sister Tatbusya, and
she was baptized with Christian baptism. And Saint Pelarianus fought a great spiritual
fight, and at length the angels would come and visit him always, and they would reveal
unto him everything, which he wanted [to know], and they would teach him concerning
hidden things before they came to pass. When Diocletian the infidel reigned he inflicted
persecution upon the Christians, and tortured them, and he slew many of them and they
became martyrs. Now this holy man and his sister used to go round and take up the bodies
of the martyrs and prepare them for burial, and bury them. And a certain evil man having
learned concerning them went and accused them to Masius, the emperor’s friend, and the
emperor commanded his soldiers to bring them to him. When they arrived they stood up
and he questioned them concerning their Faith, and they confessed that they were
Christians and did not deny it. And he promised them very many things if they would
deny our Lord Jesus Christ, and worship idols, but they would not listen to his commands,
and they did not want his promised gifts. And the emperor loved them and he said unto
them, “If ye will not hearken unto me, and will not sacrifice to my gods, I will torture you
with very many kinds of torture”; and they were not afraid of his tortures. When the
governor saw their endurance and fortitude, he delivered them over to the headsman to cut
off their heads. And when they had cut off their heads, those who were standing there saw
shining angels meeting their souls with great joy. When the emperor saw this he believed
in our Lord Christ. And the emperor shut the governor up in prison for three days, and on
the fourth day he had him brought out from the prison house and ordered the headsman to
cut off his head; and [he did so] and the saint received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens with Pelarianus, and his wife Kilkeya, and his sister Tatbusya.
Salutation to Pelarianus who buried the bodies of the martyrs, and to his wife Kilkeya and
his sister Tatbusya.
And on this day also is commemorated Gregory, Bishop of the island of Nusis (Nyssa).
Salutation to Gregory, Bishop of the city (sic) of Nusis (Nyssa).
And on this day also the men of Nagran and Saint Khirut their father were martyred in the
fifth year of the reign of the Emperor Justinus, when Abba John was Archbishop of
Jerusalem, and Abba Timothy was Archbishop of Alexandria, and Abba Timothy was
Archbishop of Constantinople, and Euphrasius was Archbishop of Antioch, and Caleb the
righteous was King of Ethiopia. And in those days there reigned in Saba a Jew whose
name was Phinehas, and he was an infidel and a man of iniquity, and one who shed the
blood of men. In ancient times the country of Saba was under the rule of the Kings of
Ethiopia, and the Roman Emperors Vespasian and Titus having driven out the Jews
166

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
subsequently inherited it. And by the side of the country of Saba was a very great city
wherein lived very many believers and men who confessed Jesus Christ. And there came
that Jewish king to destroy the holy and Christ-loving city, and to plunder the houses of the
Christians. When he came to the city he saw the sign of the Cross all round on the walls
thereof, and upon the gates and ramparts thereof were standing large numbers of mighty
men of war, and the heart of the Jewish king was filled with rage. And he wished to go
into the city but was unable to find any means of so doing, because God had strengthened
it, but he slew the slaves who were working the ground, and whom he found outside the
city, and he carried off their children into captivity, and gave them over to forced labors.
And that Jew who was as foul as Diablos, the Adversary, sent a message to the men [in the
city] saying, “I swear unto you by the Name of the Lord God, and by the Torah, and by the
prophets, that I do not wish to do you any harm, and I do not wish to ill-treat any man of
this city, and I do not wish to shed one drop of blood. But I want to see the buildings of
the city, and the broad spaces thereof, and the marketplaces”; and the people of the city
believed his word. Then Khirut, and son of Ka’ab, said, “Do not believe the word of this
infidel Jew, for he is a man of iniquity, and do not open the gates”; and the people refused
to listen to him and they opened the gates. As soon as the Jew had entered the city he
commanded [his men] first of all to plunder the goods of the men of the city, and to light a
fire so large that its flame reached unto heaven. Then he commanded them to bring to him
Abba Paul, Bishop of the city, and when they told him that he was dead, he made them
bring the bishop’s bones out of the grave and had them burned in the fire. Then he
assembled the priests, and the deacons, and the monks, and the widows and those who
were being taught, who passed day and night in reading the Holy Scriptures. [All] these he
cast into the fire, and they were in number four hundred and twenty-six souls. Now he
wanted to frighten the Christians by this act. Then he commanded his men to put a collar
round the neck of Saint Khirut, and to load his hands and feet with fetters; and he fettered
also all the nobles and chief men of the city. And he commanded a crier to go through all
the city, crying, “Whosoever will not deny Christ shall die an evil death.” When the holy
Christians heard this they cried out, saying, “Far be it from us! We will not do this thing.
We will not deny Christ our God; in Whom we have believed, and in Whose Name we
have been baptized.” When that filthy Jew heard this he killed men and women, young
men and maidens, and babes and old men, in all four thousand four hundred and fifty-two
souls. And as for the remaining women he commanded his soldiers to cut off their heads
with the sword; now they were in number two hundred and twenty-seven souls. And then
he seized Saint Demaha, the daughter of Rabe’a, the wife of Saint Khirut. Now this
woman was very beautiful, as were her two daughters, and the sun had never touched them
except when they sat in the verandah of their house. And they stood before the [Jew] king,
and he was unable to persuade them by means of his crafty promises to deny their Faith;
and when they refused he commanded his soldiers to strip off their veils, and the women of
the city wept for them. And one of her two daughters, the younger, a maiden of twelve
winters, spat in the face of the king; and a soldier who saw her drew his sword and cut off
her head and the head of her sister. Then the filthy Jew commanded his soldiers to make
Saint Demaha to drink the blood of her daughters, and as she tasted it she said, “I thank
Thee, O my Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the Living God, that Thou hast made Thine
handmaiden taste the blood of the Offering of her daughters.” And the king commanded
them to cut off her head with the sword, and she finished her martyrdom there. Then the
king commanded them to bring to him Saint Khirut, and those who were with him in the
prison house; and they were in number three hundred and forty men. And the Jew tried to
167

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
force Saint Khirut to abandon his Faith, but the saint answered and said, “Eight and
seventy years have I served my Lord Jesus Christ, and I have come to the fourth
generation. And this day I shall rejoice if I become a martyr and if I die for His holy
Name. I did tell the people not to put any confidence in thine oath, and that thou wast a
liar, but they would not believe my words. Moreover, it is the good pleasure of Christ that
hath brought me into this fight.” When the Jew king heard this he was furiously angry, and
he commanded his soldiers to take him into the valley and to cut off his head there. When
Saint Khirut heard this he prayed to God to strengthen the empire of Rome and the
kingdom of Ethiopia so that they might destroy the kingdom of the filthy Jew. And he
blessed the people and embraced them, and then the soldiers cut off the head of the saints.
And there was there a certain woman, who was a Christian, and she had a child of five
winters, and she took some of the blood of the saints and smeared herself and her son
therewith. And when the soldiers saw this they carried them bound to the king, and he
threw the woman into the fire, but the Jew took the boy and he said unto him, “Dost thou
love me or Him that is called Christ?” And the boy said, “I love Christ, and I am the slave
of Him only; let me go that I may depart to my mother.” And when the Jew held him fast
the child bit his foot, and the king snatched him up and cast him into the fire and he
became a martyr. And they also brought a woman who was carrying a child ten months
old, and his mother said unto him, “I cannot give thee to this fire”; and the child said unto
her, “O my mother, let us depart quickly into everlasting life; we shall only see this fire today,” and they cast the woman into the fire with her son. And [the king] saw his soldiers
fighting against the Christians and destroying them, some by means of fire, and others with
the edge of the sword until at length all companions of the Jews were exhausted. Then
there appeared in the heavens a fire, which filled the whole sky for forty days and forty
nights. And when the Jew king had entered into his city he sent messengers unto the
[neighboring] kings boasting of his valor. When Justinus, Emperor of Rome, heard this, he
sent a letter to Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria, calling upon him to send instructions
to Caleb, King of Ethiopia, to make war on that Jew, and to avenge the blood of the people
of Nagran. When Caleb, the King of Ethiopia, heard this, he departed into the country of
the Jew king with many soldiers, and many ships, having received the blessing of Abba
Pantaleon of the Cell. Having arrived in the country he destroyed all the city of the King
of Saba, and he left nothing therein, neither man nor beast. And he rebuilt the city of
Nagran, and established the commemoration of the martyrs thereof. And he sent glad
tidings to Justinus, Emperor of Rome, and to Timothy, the Archbishop, and there was great
joy, and they gave thanks unto Christ. Salutation to the bright Stars of Nagran who have
illumined all the world.
And on this day also died Saint Iyasus Mo’a, and on it Gelyos, and Mayen, Mekwas, and
Maryales are commemorated. Salutation to Iyasus Mo’a, who for forty years never slept
on his side.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

168

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
HEDAR 27
(December 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint James the “chopped” became a martyr. This holy man was one of the
soldiers of Sakrad, the son of Sapor, King of Persia, and he was a friend of the prince, who
loved him exceedingly, and took counsel with him about all his affairs; and for this reason
his heart inclined towards Saint James, and he made him worship the sun and fire. When
his mother and his wife and his sister heard that he had become one with the king in his
acts and in his faith, they wrote him a letter, saying, “Why hast thou forsaken the Faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and dost worship natural objects which have been created, that is to
say, the sun, and the moon, and fire? Know that if thou dost continue to hold the faith of
the King of Persia, we shall become strangers to thee.” When he had read their letter he
wept bitterly, and he said, “If I continue to be of this opinion I shall become a stranger to
my mother, and to my household and kinsfolk. But, however, how can I approach my
Lord Jesus Christ?” And he began to read Christian books, and he wept and forsook the
service of the king. And certain men told the king and spoke unto him, saying, “Behold
thy friend James hath forsaken thy service and thy love, and the worship of the gods.” And
the king sent a messenger to bring him to him, and when he had come he set him before
the king, and the king said unto him, “Why hast thou forsaken my service?” And Saint
James said unto him, “Our Lord Christ says in the gospel, ‘whosoever confesses Me before
men, him I will confess before my Father Who is in heaven. Whosoever denies Me before
the face of men, him will I deny before the angels of God’ (Matthew x, 32). Therefore
have I left thy service, and thy love, and the worship of thy gods, and I worship my Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, the Creator of the heavens, and the earth, and the
sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the seas.” When the king heard this he was
exceedingly wroth, and he commanded his guards to beat him very severely, and they did
so until his blood ran down on the ground like water; but he could not turn from his good
counsel. And the king commanded them to cut off his members with knives, and they cut
off the ten fingers of his hands and the ten toes of his feet, and his arms. And they cut him
up into thirty-two separate pieces, and as each piece was chopped off, he sang and glorified
God, saying, “O God of the Christians, my Lord and King Jesus Christ, receive Thou the
branches of the tree according to the greatness of Thy compassion. When the master of the
vineyard prunes the vines he leaves slips behind him, and these sprout in the month of
Nesan, that is to say Miyazya (April-May), and the vine puts forth [new] roots and spreads
abroad.” When only the head, and breast, and loins of the holy man were left, and he knew
he was nigh to the giving up of his soul, at that moment he prayed to God for the world,
and for the people therein, and that He would teach them and have compassion upon them.
And he said, “There is left to me neither limb nor hand which I can lift up to Thee, O Lord;
behold my limbs have been cast away before me, O Lord receive my soul.” And
straightway our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him and comforted him, and strengthened
him, and immediately his soul rejoiced and was glad. And before he delivered up his soul
one of the guards made haste, and cut of his head with a sharp sword, and Saint James
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens, and he depart to the
habitation of light, to Christ Who loved him. And certain God-fearing men took his body
and made it ready for burial and wrapped it in costly cloths, and they laid it in a pure place.
When his mother and his wife and his sister heard that he had become a martyr they
169

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
rejoiced with great joy, and they came to the place where his body was, and they embraced
it and wept over it, and laid splendid cloths over it and sweet scents and unguents. When
the days of Saints Honorius and Arcadius and other kings arrived, they built in his honor
churches, and monasteries and nunneries. When the King of Persia heard the report of
those monasteries, and the stories of the martyrs and their bodies, and what great signs and
wonders had appeared through them in every place, he commanded his soldiers to burn the
martyrs’ bodies in every place with fire, and not to allow anything of them to remain in the
country of his dominion. And certain believing men came and carried away the body of
the saint, and they carried it and brought it to Jerusalem, and deposited it there. And then
they brought it to Peter, Bishop of the city of Roha (Edessa), and it remained with him
until Marcianus reigned, and then Saint Peter took it and brought it to the country of Egypt,
and deposited it in the city of Behensa, where it remained for a few days with certain
brethren. And whilst these men were praying at mid-day, and the body of Saint James was
in their midst, straightway Saint James appeared with many of the martyrs of Persia,
arrayed in Persian apparel; and they sang with them, and they blessed them, and then they
disappeared. And before they disappeared from their sight Saint James said unto them,
“My body shall stay here even as God commanded.” After this Saint Peter the bishop
wished to return to his own country, and he took the body of Saint James with him, and he
carried it to the sea and laid it in a ship, but the voice of Saint James went round about,
saying, “My body shall stay here.” And straightway the body of Saint James was snatched
out of their hands, and returned to the place wherein it had been, even as God commanded;
and great signs and wonders took place through the body of Saint James. Salutation to
Saint James who was cut up into thirty-two pieces.
And on this day also Saint Timothy, a native of Banhor, became a martyr. This holy man
was a fearer of God from his youth, and he devoted himself to fasting and prayer. He had
a wife whose name was Mora, the daughter of his father’s brother, and she was very
beautiful, and she gave him pleasure by all her works and they lived together for many
days in love and happiness. Whilst they were living in this state of quietness the Imperial
Edict of the wicked Diocletian went forth into all the countries of his Empire ordering the
heathen temples to be opened and the churches to be closed. When Saint Timothy heard
this he rejoiced exceedingly, for he had been waiting for this time, and he told his wife
what he was going to do; and she said, “God’s Will be done.” Then he rose up and prayed
to God to prosper his way, and as he was sleeping that night our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared unto him, and He said, “Peace be unto thee, O My beloved Timothy, behold I
have numbered thee among the number of the righteous. Rise up now, and take thy wife,
and go to the city of Behensa, and confess the Name of Christ before all the people who
worship idols.” When he awoke he told his wife what he had seen, and she told him that
she had dreamed even so. Then they rose up together and came to Quilquilianus, the
governor, and they found him celebrating a festival with singers and dancers who were
performing before him. Then the soldiers seized Timothy and set him before him, and his
wife was following him. And the governor spoke unto him with gentle and persuasive
words and tried to make him worship idols, but the saint reviled him and his foul faith;
therefore was the governor angry and he commanded them to cast him into prison. After a
few days the governor had him and his wife brought out and beaten with whips until their
blood ran down on the ground like water; and his wife finished her strife under this torture.
And Saint Timothy he treated with gentleness because he wished to make him agree to
worship idols. And when he refused to do so the governor had the saint’s body smeared
with oil and grease, and cast him into a red-hot fiery furnace. And whilst the holy man
170

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
was in the fire Gabriel, an angel of God, came down to him from heaven, and delivered
him from this torture. Then the governor cast the saint into the prison house a second time,
where he wrought many signs and wonders. One day whilst he was praying there our Lord
Jesus Christ came to him, and made a covenant with him and gave him peace. And on the
following day the governor had him brought out of the prison house, and they took him to
the city of Zanhus, and they cut off his holy head. Thereupon an earthquake took place,
and the air was filled with angels, and the men of the city came and prepared him for burial
in a splendid manner and buried him. When the time of persecution had passed they built
a church for him, and consecrated it on the seven and twentieth day of the month of Sane
(June-July), and they laid his holy body in it. Salutation to Timothy and to his wife Mora.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Philemon the apostle, who was one of the
Seventy-two disciples. Salutation to thy tongue with its eloquent words and pleasant
speech, thou father of the city (or country) of Lydia.
And on this day also are commemorated ‘Al’are, and Abba Takla Hawaryat of Gabrema,
and Clement the martyr of ‘Endabergoy of Rebotch (or Zarbatch). Salutation to Takla
Hawaryat.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 28
(December 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Sarapamon, Bishop of the city of Nakiyos (or Lukyos), became a martyr.
This holy man was a kinsman of Stephen, of the tribe of Levi, from the city of Jerusalem.
His father’s name was Abraham, and he was a son of Levi, the son of Joseph, brother of
Simon, and brother of the mother of Stephen, and at the time of his birth he called his
name Simon. When his father died he wished to become a Christian. And the angel of the
Lord appeared unto him and commanded him go to Abba John, bishop of the city, and he
went to him and the bishop revealed to him the mystery of Christ our God becoming man.
And it is not said that he baptized him with Christian baptism in the city of Jerusalem,
because of the fear of the Jews, his kinsmen. Now the bishop of the city was pondering
what he should do about him, and our Lady Mary appeared unto him and told him to
depart to the city of Alexandria, to the Archbishop Abba Theonas. And as he was going
thither, the angel of the Lord was in the form of a prince, and he informed the archbishop
about Sarapamon. When he had come to him the archbishop taught him the path of God,
and he baptized him with holy Christian baptism. Then Sarapamon became a monk in the
monastery of Abba Severus, which is outside the city of Alexandria. When the
Archbishop Theonas died, and Abba Peter was appointed to succeed him, he sent and
brought this holy man Sarapamon to him, to help him in the work of the archiepiscopate.
After this he appointed him Bishop of the city of Nakyanos, and the churches rejoiced in
him greatly, and God wrought very many signs and wonders by his hands. And nigh unto
his city there were idols, which certain of the people therein used to worship, and he used
to ask God to destroy them. And God accepted his petition, for the earth swallowed them
171

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
up and the waters of the sea rose up over them and covered them; and through his prayer
God destroyed the idols that were in his diocese, and He crushed the blasphemy of
Sibellius who made the Father and the Son, and the Holy Spirit one Person (or Substance).
And when Diocletian denied Christ certain people told him, saying, “Sarapamon is
destroying the worship of the idols which are the king’s gods”; and having heard very
many complaints he commanded his soldiers to bring Sarapamon to him, and they did so.
When Saint Sarapamon arrived in the city of Alexandria with the messengers of the
emperor, Abba Peter the archbishop came to him, and there were many clergy with him,
and embraced him, and he saw his face as it were the face of an angel of God. And when
he came to the Emperor Diocletian had him tortured with various tortures, and our Lord
Jesus Christ raised him up sound and whole, and uninjured and without suffering; and
many people believed because of him. Now the emperor was afraid to add to his tortures
lest the multitudes should believe through him. And he sent him away into Upper Egypt,
to Arianus, the governor of Antinoe, so that he might torture him there and cut off his head
with the sword. Now at that time Arianus was governor of the city of Alexandria. And
Arianus took Saint Sarapamon with him in a ship to go to Upper Egypt, and when the ship
reached Nakyos his city, it ran aground and it was impossible to remove it from where it
stood. And Arianus had Saint Sarapamon brought up from inside the ship, and carried him
to the north of the city, and they cut off his head with the sword, and he received the crown
of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And the people took his body with great
honor, and carried it to the church and laid it therein, and through it very many signs and
miracles were wrought there. Salutation to Sarapamon before whom the lions bowed when
they saw thy face, which was the image of that of the Creator.
And on this day is commemorated Abba Likanos the priest, who fought a spiritual fight in
the monastery of Kuonasel, in the country of Ethiopia. Salutation to Abba Likanos, from
whose fingers burning lamps shot forth.
Salutation to Abraham the faithful man, and to Isaac the offering, and to Jacob who
anointed the stone with oil, in whose bosoms live the righteous, like dates on the palm tree
and clusters of grapes on the vine.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

172

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
HEDAR 29
(December 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became a martyr Saint Peter, the seventeenth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria; and he was the last of the martyrs. The father of this holy man was the high
priest of the city of Alexandria, and his name was Theodore; the name of his mother was
Sophia. And they were fearers of God and they had no children at all. And on the fifth
day of the month Hamle (July-Aug.), the day of the festival of Peter and Paul the apostles,
the mother of the holy man saw many Christians with their children, and they wore festal
apparel with decorations, and they were going to church; and she was exceedingly
sorrowful. And she went into the church and stood up before the altar of the saint, and she
besought our Lord Christ with many tears to give her a son. And that night Peter and Paul
the apostles appeared unto her, and they said unto her, “Behold God hath accepted thy
petition, and He will assuredly give thee a son, and thou shall call his name ‘Peter’”; and
they commanded her to go to the Archbishop Theonas that the people might pray for her.
And after certain days she brought forth this holy man, and she called his name “Peter”.
When his days were seven years she gave him to the archbishop even as [Hannah gave]
Samuel the prophet to Eli, and he became to him like a beloved son; and the archbishop
made him a reader, and after that he made him a deacon, and after that he made him a
priest. And he used to help the archbishop in all his divers good works and in his
administration of the churches. When Abba Theonas was dying he commanded the
bishops and priests to appoint Abba Peter archbishop in his place, and they appointed him
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria; and when he was appointed all the people and all the
churches rejoiced. And it came to pass in the days of Diocletian, the infidel emperor, that
there lived in the city of Alexandria a certain judge who was of the same opinion as the
emperor, and who worshipped idols with him, and he had two sons. And his wife was a
Christian, but she was unable to have her sons baptized with Christian baptism in the city
of Antioch, and she therefore took them and embarked on a ship in order to come to
Alexandria. As they were journeying over the sea, a violent storm rose up against them,
and she was afraid that her two sons would die without baptism. And she cut her breasts,
and made the sign of the Cross with her blood, which she smeared over the foreheads of
her sons, and she dipped them in the sea three times in the Name of the Father and the Son
and the Holy Ghost. Then a great calm came, and they were saved from drowning and
arrived in the city of Alexandria. And she brought her sons to the Archbishop Abba Peter
so that he might baptize them with Christian baptism, together with the sons of the men of
Alexandria. And when the archbishop wished to immerse her boys, the water congealed
and became as hard as a stone; and he tried to immerse them three times, and each time the
water became like a stone. And the archbishop marveled and asked her what had
happened, and she related to him how a wind storm had risen up at sea, and how she had
cut her breasts, and how she had signed the foreheads of her sons with the sign of the Cross
with her blood, and how she had immersed them in the sea three times in the Name of the
Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. When the archbishop heard this he marveled
exceedingly and praised God, saying, “Thus says the Church; as one is baptism even so
one is the Church.” And in the days of this father Archbishop Abba Peter one Arius, a
heretic, rose up, and the saint rebuked him but he would not hearken to his words; and
having rebuked him many times and Arius having refused to turn from his wicked opinion,
173

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Abba Peter anathematized him and excommunicated him. And when the Emperor
Diocletian heard the report of this Saint Peter, and that he was teaching the multitudes
everywhere not to worship the gods, he sent messengers to him to seize Saint Peter and to
shut him up in prison. And when the men of the city knew this straightway they took their
weapons of war with them and they came to the prison house to fight the messengers of the
emperor. And when Saint Peter saw that there was going to be a great tumult on his
account, he wished to yield up his soul to death for his people, and he wanted to be
released from this world and to be with Christ. And he made all the people come to him,
and he comforted them and commended them to be strong in the True Faith. When Arius
knew that the blessed Peter was departing to God and leaving him under the ban of
excommunication, he went to the great high priests, and told them to beseech the blessed
Peter on his behalf, so that he might release him from the ban of excommunication; but
when the chief priests entreated the blessed Peter on behalf of Arius, he added to the ban of
excommunication which he had laid upon him. And he said unto them, “I have seen a
vision this night, and behold our Lord Jesus Christ was standing with His rent raiment.
And I said unto Him, My Lord, ‘Who hath rent Thy raiment?’ And He said unto me,
‘Arius hath rent My raiment; he separated Me from My Father. Beware of him.’” Then
Saint Peter commanded Arkilas (Archelaus) and Alexander, and said unto them, “Ye will
have to appoint an archbishop after me; beware of Arius, and have no fellowship with him
in the work of the priesthood, and release him not from the ban of excommunication, for
he is the enemy of Christ. And thou ‘Arkilas (Archelaus) shall be archbishop after me and
before Alexander, and thou shalt meet Arius and shalt die speedily.” After this the blessed
Peter took counsel with the messengers of the emperor (sic) in secret that they might bring
him out from the inside of the prison house, and they dug opposite to it and took him out
and finished the emperor’s command. And they did as he commanded them, and they took
him and brought him outside the city, [to the place] where was the grave of the blessed
Mark the evangelist. [The text of this passage is corrupt.] And Saint Peter prayed and
committed his people to the care of God, and he prayed again, saying, “O my Lord Christ,
let the shedding of my blood be the end of the worship of idols, and may they be brought
to naught and perish throughout the world.” And a voice came from heaven, saying,
“Amen! It shall be according as thou sayest”, and a certain virgin who was near that place
heard these words. And Saint Peter said unto the soldiers of the emperor, “Finish what ye
have been commanded to do”; and straightway they cut off his holy head with the sword
and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And his body
stood upright for a space of two hours. And the people made haste and went out from the
city, for they were by the prison house and they did not know what had become of the saint
until one told them what had happened. And they took the body of their shepherd and their
chief and made it ready for burial, and they brought it to the city and took it into the
church, and laid it upon his seat on which no one had ever once seen him sit, even as he
told them. And when they asked him, saying, “Why dost thou not sit upon thy throne?” he
answered and said unto them, “I see the power of God sitting upon it, and therefore I do
not dare to sit upon it.” Then they finished making him ready for the grave, and they laid
his body with the bodies of the chosen saints, the archbishops. And he sat upon the throne
of Mark the evangelist fourteen years, and he was appointed archbishop in the tenth year of
the reign of Diocletian. And many signs and mighty wonders took place through his body.
Salutation to Peter, the preacher of the Faith, the counterpart of Paul.

174

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also is commemorated the Birth of our Lord and God and Redeemer, Jesus
Christ, of the holy two-fold Virgin Mary, our Lady. Salutation to Thy Birth, O Thou Who
didst show to Peter Thy raiment, which Arius had rent.
And on this day also are commemorated the forty-seven thousand martyrs who suffered in
the time of the Emperor Diocletian. Salutation to the righteous men who fought against
Diocletian. [This paragraph is wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also became a martyr the great Saint Clement, Archbishop of the city of
Rome. This holy man was a royal kinsman, and was the son of Caustus, the captain of the
army of the Emperor of Rome; his excellent and honorable parents taught him all the
various kinds of learning and the philosophy of the Greeks. And when Peter the apostle
preached in Rome the preaching of the Gospel, Caustus the father of Clement believed
through this holy man that our Lord Jesus Christ was truly [God], and he gave all his goods
to the poor and needy. And when his father went to the emperor he remained many days,
and the brother of the holy man Caustus thought that he would marry his wife. When the
mother of the holy man knew this, she took Clement and his younger brother and
embarked on a ship, to go to Athens, and to have her sons taught philosophy and learning
until their father returned from the emperor. And straightway a violent storm rose up
against them, and the ship was smashed, and one after another clung to one of the timbers,
and the waves of the sea washed this holy Clement to the city of Alexandria, where he
remained a few days. And God called Peter the apostle and said unto him, “Get thee to the
city of Alexandria so that thou mayest find the servants who are fit for mercy.” And when
Peter the apostle came to the city of Alexandria, and preached the preaching of the Gospel
therein, no man in the city of Alexandria believed except this holy man Clement. When,
however, he heard the preaching of Peter the apostle he believed on our Lord Jesus Christ,
and Peter baptized him with Christian baptism, and explained to him the Godhead of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the riches and glory of those who worship Him, and how signs and
wonders are wrought [in His Name]. And from that day Clement followed Peter the
apostle, and he became his disciple, and he wrote the “Contendings of the Apostles,” and
what happened to them with infidel kings. Then he preached in many cities, and the
apostles gave unto him the Books of the Canon to proclaim, and then he was appointed
Archbishop of the city of Rome. And he preached therein, and converted very many
people thereof to the knowledge of God. And the Emperor Trajan, the infidel, heard of
him, and he sent his guards to seize him and bring him before him, and the emperor said
unto him, “Worship the idols and deny Christ.” And when Clement would not hearken
unto his command he sent him away to a certain city to be tortured, for he was afraid of the
men of the city of his kinsfolk, and he did not want to torture him where he was lest the
people should rise up against him. So he sent him away to the governor of that city and
ordered him to torture him with many tortures. And that governor hung round the neck of
the holy man Clement a heavy iron implement with four feet (anchor), which is placed in
ships, and he cast him into the sea. And he delivered up his soul into the hand of God, and
he received the crown of martyrdom like the apostles who preached. And it came to pass
that when a full year had passed he was seen in the sea, and the body of Saint Clement
appeared, and he was preaching in the depths of the sea just as if he were alive. And the
people came and were blessed by him, and they wished to carry him off, and they brought
a splendid stone coffer, and laid him in it, and they wished to take him up and bring him
out of the sea, but they were unable to move him from his place. And they knew that he
was unwilling to come out of the sea and they left him there, and departed. And each year,
175

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
on the day of his festival, an opening appears in the box above his body, and the people
come and are blessed by him. And many believing men who have seen this have described
and written down accounts of some of his miracles, such as the following. One year
certain men came to be blessed by him, and when they went forth from him they forgot a
little child who was behind the coffer of Saint Clement. This happened by the Will of our
Lord Jesus Christ, so that He might reveal their work to His saints and friends, and the
grace, which they receive from Him. And when they had gathered together above the sea,
they sought for the father [of the child] and found him not. And they thought that he was
dead and that the beasts, which are in the sea, had devoured him, and they wept for him,
and they celebrated his commemoration, and they consecrated the Offering and offered up
incense according to their custom. And when the second year had arrived and the time had
come for the sea to open itself again, certain men who came according to their custom,
found the child alive and standing up by the side of the coffer of Clement. And they asked
him, saying, “How didst thou exist and on what didst thou live?” And he said unto them,
“Saint Clement gave me food to eat and drink, and God preserved me from the wild beasts
of the sea.” And when they heard this they marveled exceedingly and they praised God
Who is to be praised and glorified above all His saints and martyrs who have contended for
His holy Name’s sake. Salutation to Clement the author of the “Contendings of the
Apostles”.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

HEDAR 30
(December 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Acadius, Archbishop of the city of Contantinople. This holy man was
learned, and excellent, and good, and he translated books of theology, and he was
appointed priest in the church of the city of Constantinople. Now a General Council was
held in the city of Chalcedon, and this father was not pleased with all that took place
thereat. When they searched for him to come because of his knowledge, he made a
pretence to them that he was sick. When he heard of the tribulation which they had
inflicted upon Saint Dioscurus, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, he was exceedingly
sorry, and he began to curse their Council before his companions, and friends, and the
principal military officers of the Government whom he knew to be Orthodox, and whose
works he knew to be good. And he said, “I thank God that I did not mix myself up with
these evil members of the Council.” When Anatolius, Archbishop of the city of
Constantinople, died, the members of the Government, and the military officers and the
believers chose this father Acacius to be Archbishop of Constantinople, because they knew
he was Orthodox. And they appointed him archbishop because they had hope in him and
thought that he would be able to remove from the Church division and enmity. When he
was appointed he found the disease of division and enmity therein, and he strove diligently
and in every way possible to remove it, but could not do so in the least degree; only God
Himself could do it. And he thought in his heart and said, “It will be best for me to save
myself.” First of all he sent a letter to Abba Peter, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria,
confessing therein to him the True Faith of the Holy Trinity, which he had learned and
176

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
received from the divine fathers Abba Cyril and Abba Dioscurus; and then he continued to
write very many letters asking him to support him in priestly fellowship. When Peter
received his letters he wrote a letter of acceptance and [another] letter dealing with general
matters, and sent them off in charge of three bishops. And the bishops came to the city of
Constantinople secretly, and they gathered together this father Acacius, and they gave him
the letter of Abba Peter; and Acacius treated them with great honor, and received the letters
from them with great joy. And he read the letter before his friends, and the Orthodox
nobles of the city, and they all confessed with him the True Faith as it was written in the
letter of Saint Abba Peter. Then he wrote a letter with his own hand before them accepting
[the Faith] of Abba Dioscurus and Abba Timothy, and Abba Peter, and he confessed that
they were of the True Faith, and he excommunicated all those who were opposed to them.
Then he took the three bishops and carried them away with him to a certain monastery
which was outside the city of Constantinople, and he prepared the Eucharist and they took
part with him in the Liturgy and in the Offering, and they took from him the letter which
he had written and they were blessed by him and he by them, and then he set them on their
way and bade them farewell in peace. When they came to Abba Peter they told him
everything, which had happened, and also how they had taken part together with Abba
Acacius in the Liturgy and the Offering, and how he had accepted his letter; and he
preached in his name at the time of the Offering and the consecrations and the prayers.
And the report of him was heard by the Bishop of Rome, and he drove Abba Acacius from
the throne of Constantinople, and he died in exile, being strong in the True Faith.
Salutation to Acacius the successor of Anatolius.
And on this day also are commemorated Mercurius the martyr, and the consecration of the
church of Cosmas and Damianus, and their brethren, and the death of Gabra Maskal, King
of Ethiopia, the Orthodox [died A.D. 1344]. Salutation to Gabra Maskal, who hath passed
to the city of light. Salutation to Gabra Maskal who rejoiced in the power of God.
And on this day also Anianus of Amid [the Stylite], and Peter became [martyrs].
Here endeth what shall be read during the blessed month of Khedar. [Here follows in the
Bodleian MS, the following . . . God, the Most High. Who is to be praised? Blessed be
His Name. Praise to Him [is due] from us. May there be to us mercy from Him. For
every eye awaiteth Him. It is He Who beginneth, it is He Who finisheth. Everything is
ruled by Him. Let us worship Him. And He is our help for ever and ever, Amen and
Amen; so be it, so be it!]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

177

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE FOURTH MONTH
TAHISAS 01
(December 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Elias, that is Elias Zelotes, appeared before Israel. He was of the tribe of Levi.
His father’s name was Iyasenyu and that of his mother Tona. Concerning him it is said
that on the day of his birth his father saw two men shining with light bowing down before
him, and they wrapped the boy in fire instead of the rags in which they wrap children. And
after his birth his father came to Jerusalem and told the priests this, and they said, “Is it that
his abode shall be in light, and that he shall cut (i.e. decide) with his words, and shall judge
Israel with the sword and with fire?” Now the story of the miracles, which he wrought in
the days of Ahab, the king and his wife Jezebel, and the story of his ascension into heaven,
are written in the section for the sixth day of the month of Ter (Jan.-Feb.), and concerning
his death also. The Vision of John Abukalamsis (i.e. John of the Apocalypse) saith that he
will come with Enoch and will rebuke the False Christ, and they shall perform miracles
before him. And he shall call them the two olive trees, and the two lamps, which are
before God. And having conquered them, and slain them, and cast out their dead bodies
for three days, the Spirit of God shall come and shall enter into them, and they shall rise up
alive and all those who see them shall be afraid. And when a voice shall call them they
shall go up to heaven upon a cloud, and then there shall be a great earthquake, and men
shall die, one hundred souls. Salutation to Elias who shut up the heaven that there should
be no rain.
And on this day also died Naboth the Jezreelite. This Naboth was the possessor of a
vineyard near the threshing floor of Ahab, the king in Samaria; and Ahab said unto
Naboth, “Give me this thy vineyard so that it may become the place of an oil press, for it is
nigh unto my house, and I will give thee gold, the price of thy vineyard.” And Naboth said
unto Ahab, “God forbid that I should give thee the inheritance of my fathers”; and Ahab
was very sorry and he went and lay down upon his bed, and he covered his face and
refused to eat. And Jezebel his wife came unto him and said, “What maketh thee so sorry
that thou dost not eat?” And he said unto her, “I talked with Naboth and I said unto him,
‘Give me thy vineyard at a price’; and he said, ‘I will not give my father’s inheritance for
gold.’” And Jezebel said unto him, “Dost thou thus act the king for Israel? Rise up and eat
and I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.” And she wrote a letter in
Ahab’s name, and she sealed it with his seal, and she sent that letter to the elders of the city
who lived with Naboth, and in it she spoke thus, “Proclaim ye a fast, and place Naboth
before the people, and set up two men, sons of inequity, who shall say, ‘He cursed God and
the king’; then take him outside [the city] and stone him to death.” And the men of the city
did according to the message which Jezebel sent to them, and they proclaimed a fast and
they set Naboth before the people, and two men, sons of iniquity, came, and they testified
against Naboth, saying, “He cursed God and the king”; and then they took him outside the
city and stoned him and he died. Salutation to Naboth who was killed by King Ahab for
the sake of his vineyard.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Peter of the city of Gaza. This holy man
was a native of the city of Roha (Edessa) and belonged to a noble family, and his parents
178

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
gave him to the Emperor Theodosius so that he might appoint him a governor, and he
made him a governor. And he renounced rank and glory, and fought spiritually and
devoted himself to the worship of God in the palace of the emperor, and he had with him
some of the bodies of the holy martyrs from the country of Persia; now at that time his
days were twenty years. Then he went out and became a monk in a certain monastery, and
he fought a great spiritual fight. When the bishops heard of his holiness, and his spiritual
strife, they took him and against his will made him Bishop of Gaza and all the neighboring
district. And it is said of him that when he read the Office for the consecration of the
Offering, so much blood flowed from the Offering that [the vessel] was filled with His
Blood. And when they brought the body of Saint James the “dismembered” he took it and
dwelt in one of the monasteries of Jerusalem. And it came to pass in the days of Marcion
the heretic that he fled to the land of Egypt, and with him was the body of James the
“dismembered”; and he dwelt in a monastery for some days. Once when he was preparing
to consecrate the Offering certain men who were standing there talked together at the time
of the preparation, but Saint Peter did not rebuke them. And he saw the angel of the Lord
holding him back from them, and he wished to cast himself down on the ground for he
honored them and was afraid to rebuke them. When the days of Marcion the infidel were
ended, Saint Peter returned to the land of Palestine. And he strengthened the churches, and
the people foregathered with him, and they assembled about Isaiah the Egyptian. And the
report of him was heard by Zeno the emperor, and he wished to see him, but Peter neither
wished it nor desired it, because he fled from the affairs of this fleeting world. Then he
came to the shore of the lake (or sea) of Gawer and dwelt there. And there came the feast
of Saint Peter, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and he made arrangements to
consecrate the church on the day of his festival. And Saint Peter appeared unto him and
said, “Behold, our Lord Christ will call thee to come to us,” and from that day Saint Peter
knew the time of his death. And he summoned the people to him, and he commanded
them to be strong in the True Faith; then he stretched out his hand, and delivered up his
soul into the hand of God. Salutation to Peter, for when he broke the bread of the Offering
blood distilled there from until the whole of the paten was filled therewith.
And on this day died the holy father Abba John, the thirtieth (sic) Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This holy man was a priest, and he was a native of the city of Gamnudi. And
in the days of this father the church of Sergius and Bacchus, the holy martyrs, was built,
and also the church of ‘Abukir and the church of John in the inner wall of Mesr (Cairo).
And a certain God-fearing man, an Egyptian, a Jacobite, whose name was Andrias, and
who was a scribe of Abdal-Aziz, and son of Merwan, took care of them. And it was this
father Abba John who was building the church of Saint Mark the evangelist in the city of
Alexandria, which is known as “Kamos” for a period of three years in the days of King
Adel. And during the days of this father a great famine, [which lasted] for three years,
took place. And he was careful for the poor, and the needy, and those who were in misery,
and he used to give them silver and bread twice a week, and he gave many alms and gifts
to the poor, and was a doer of good works. In his days the Khalifah Yazid died, and
Merwan reigned in his stead. This father sat upon the throne of Mark the evangelist for
nine years, and he died in peace. Salutation to Archbishop John with whom, on the day of
his death, is associated the Patriarch Athanasius.
And on this day also died the holy father Athanasius, the seventy-third (or seventy-sixth)
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, who was known as Paul, the son of the priest
179

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Makram, the son of Kalil, and Peter, and James the Persian, and Elijah the monk, and
Barsabeh (Bathsabeh), the mother of Solomon.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 02
(December 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day God performed an act of power for the Three Children, that is to say, Ananias,
Azarias and Misael, and sons of Eliakim, the King of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar
carried off into captivity with their father, and he reared them in his house and sold them in
the country of Babylon. When Nebuchadnezzar had made the image of gold he
commanded his officers and the people of his kingdom to worship it. And when certain
men informed against them and told the king that the saints had refused to worship it, he
commanded his soldiers to cast them into a fiery furnace which they had heated seven
times hotter than usual; and they prayed for a long time with their hands stretched out.
Then the angel of the Lord went down and made the fire to become like a cool wind, and
he brought them out, and the fire had neither touched them nor singed the hair of their
heads. When Nebuchadnezzar saw this he bowed down and worshipped God, and he
honored the Three Children exceedingly. Salutation to Shadrach, Meshach and Abdenego,
who were preserved by God in a fiery furnace, which was heated with pitch and asphalt.
And on this day also seven hundred and thirty-three (or seven thousand and three) souls
were martyred by Diocletian and they died in the city of Antioch; these were the slaves of
Fasiladas and his kinsfolk.
And on this day also [are commemorated] the deaths of Abtesfen, and Anbas, from the
West; and Nathaniel the monk, the worker of miracles; [and Abba Hor the Monk].
Salutation to Eutychianus who finished his course and kept his Faith.
And on this day also died Saint Abba Hor the monk. This holy man was a native of the
city of Gawrah in Upper Egypt. And he became a chosen monk, and he fought the fight
and he was superior to very many of the saints in his piety and spiritual strife; and he loved
to live by himself, and he went out into the desert, and he dwelt there, a devoted ascetic,
for many years. And Satan, the enemy of good things, appeared unto him openly and said
unto him, “In the desert thou canst conquer us, because there are no men here; but if thou
wouldst [show thy self] to be mighty and strong [go] to the city of Alexandria.” When
Saint Abba Hor heard this he rose up and went to Alexandria, and he drew water for those
who were in prison and for the poor. And at that time three horses used to pass through the
city galloping, and one of them kicked a child and he died immediately. And Satan
entered into the hearts of the men of the city, and they meditated in their hearts and said,
“No one killed this child except this old monk.” And Abba Hor came and took the child in
his arms, and he prayed in his heart and made entreaty to God, and he made the sign of the
Cross over him, and the soul of the child returned to him, and he rose up alive, and Abba
Hor gave him to his mother. And Abba Hor fled out of the city and they sought for him,
180

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
but could not find him; and he went to the desert and lived there for many years, and he
fought the spiritual fight continually, and he devoted himself to righteousness and doing
works of excellence. When the time for his departure drew night he saw many saints
calling him, and he rejoiced exceedingly. And he sent and gathered together his sons, and
he commanded them to be strong in the path of the ascetic life, and in working
righteousness, and he told them that he was about to depart to our Lord Jesus Christ; and
they were exceedingly sorry. Then he became sick a little and he delivered up his soul into
the hand of God. Salutation to Abba Hor, whose prayer restored the dead to life.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 03
(December 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the entrance of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, into
the Sanctuary (i.e. Temple) of Jerusalem, when she was three years old, and she was the
daughter of a vow to God. Because her mother Hannah was childless the [other] women
who were in the House of God kept themselves away from her, and she was exceedingly
sorry about this; now Joachim her husband was an old man. And God heard their cry.
And the blessed Hannah vowed a vow to God, saying, “The fruit which He shall give me I
will devote to God.” And having brought forth our Lady Mary she reared her for three
years in her house, and after this she took her to live with the virgins in the Sanctuary of
God. And Mary dwelt in the Sanctuary for twelve years, and received her sustenance from
the hands of angels, until the time when our Lord Christ came into the world, and took
flesh from her, the elect of all women. And when she had completed twelve years in the
Sanctuary, the priests took counsel together about her so that they might give her unto one
who would protect her, for she was vowed to God, and it was not right in their sight that
she should blossom in the Sanctuary and become after the manner of women therein. Then
they called her by a name of honor for him that should be worthy to see her. And
Zachariah, the high priest, answered and said, “Bring Mary hither so that I may find out
what is in her heart”; and they called her and she came and stood before him. And
Zachariah said, “Know, O Mary, that thou hast grown up and that thou art mature like any
other woman. Dost thou wish to be married? [If so] we will seek out for thee a good, and
blessed, and God-fearing young man, and we will marry thee to him. Or, wouldst thou
rather remain in the Sanctuary and minister unto God all the days of thy life? [If so] we
will lay upon thee the prohibition which is written in the Torah that thou salt not approach
the gates of the Sanctuary during the days wherein there happeneth to thee what happeneth
to women.” And our Lady Mary answered and said unto him, “Behold, I am the
handmaiden of the Lord before you; I have neither father nor mother. Ye are to me in the
place of my father and my mother before God, holy and blessed be His Name! What ye
know to be the command of God in respect of me that do for me.” And the priests and all
the Sanhedrim said unto Zachariah the priest, “Go to the Sanctuary and pray to God, and
God shall make it clear to thee concerning Mary.” And Zachariah put on his priestly
vestments, and went into the Sanctuary, and prayed to God concerning Mary. And the
angel of the Lord appeared unto him and said unto him, “Zachariah, go forth and gather
181

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
together all the men and old men, and take their staffs, and write the name of each man
upon his staff. Then gather together all the staffs into the Sanctuary, and pray to God; and
after this go forth and give unto each man his staff. And the man on whose staff the Lord
God shall make a sign to appear is he who is worthy that Mary shall be given unto him to
protect.” And Zachariah the priest went forth and told the assembly what the angel of God
had said unto him. And straightway he sent criers out into every land of Israel and into the
cites and villages, and they cried out, saying, “Let every man of the House of David,
whether he be young or old, whose wife is dead, go to Jerusalem.” When Joseph of the
House of David heard this he took his staff and went from Nazareth to Jerusalem, where he
found very many men gathered together. And Zachariah the priest took all their staffs and
wrote their names upon them and the staffs were in number seventeen hundred and eightyfive. And he prayed to God inside the Sanctuary, and all the men who were standing
outside the Sanctuary prayed likewise. And when Zachariah had finished his prayer he
brought out the staffs, and gave unto every man the staff, which belonged to him. When
Joseph, the carpenter, drew nigh to take his staff, there appeared from out of it the form of
a white dove and it flew up and stood upon his head. And when the priests and all the
people saw this they marveled exceedingly and they glorified God greatly. And Zachariah
said unto Joseph, “Take Mary the Virgin and keep her in thy house, even as the angel of
the Lord saith”; and Joseph took our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, and she dwelt with him
until Gabriel, the angel of the Lord came to her, and told her that the Son of God was to
take flesh from her. Salutation to the coming of Mary, according to the Law of Moses.
And on this day also is celebrate the festival of the glorious angel, Fanuel the archangel.
Salutation to thy office in the court of God, O Fanuel, thou ladder of prayer, and expeller
of Satan.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 04
(December 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy Apostle Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, became a martyr. The
lot of this holy man went forth that he should preach in the city of Leda, and in the cities of
Akorakod. When he came into the city of Leda, many of the people thereof believed
through Peter his brother; and he had with him Philemon, his disciple, who had a sweet
voice, and he was wise, and a good reader, and pious. And Andrew the apostle
commanded him to go up on the top of certain steps and to read (or sing) in a sweet voice,
and he went up and read in a sweet voice. And when the priests of the idols heard of the
coming of Andrew the apostle, they rose up and took their weapons of war and went to the
church so that they might hear whether [the Christians] cursed their gods [or not]. And
when they heard Philemon reading and saying, “The gods of the nations are gold and
silver, the work of men’s hands. They have mouths and speak not, they have eyes and see
not, they have ears and hear not, they have noses and smell not, they have hands and
handle not, they have feet and walk not, they cry not out with their throats, and there is no
182

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
breath in their mouths. May those who make them and those who put their trust in them
become like unto them!” (Psalm cxv). And through his beautiful voice and the sweetness
of his words their hearts were opened, and they came into the church, and bowed down at
the feet of Andrew the apostle, and they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ. And the
apostle taught them the doctrine of the Church and baptized them with Christian baptism;
and many of those who worshipped idols believed with them. After this Satan came into
the city and he found playing together two youths, one of whom was the son of John, the
priest of the city, and the other the son of one of the great men of the city. And whilst one
of them was amusing himself with the other he smote the other a blow, and he died. And
the father [of the dead boy] made a charge against [the father of the living boy] and he said
unto him, “Bring me thy son so that I may kill him in the place of my son whom he killed.”
When John heard this he was very sorry, and he said unto the men of the city, “Be surety
for me whilst I go to my father Andrew who shall come and raise up the boy who is dead”
and they became surety for him. And John the priest came to Saint Andrew and he found
him baptizing all the people. And Andrew answered and said unto him, “I cannot go with
thee at this moment because of the people whom I have to baptize, but take Philemon with
thee, and he shall raise for thee the boy who is dead.” So Philemon and John the priest
departed from Andrew, and when he came to the city of Nawa [he found] Koros the
governor searching for the murderer, for Satan had told him all that had happened, and he
imagined that a grown up man [had been killed]. And the people said unto Philemon, “Go
not into the city lest the governor kill thee”; and Philemon said, “I cannot transgress the
command of my lord and teacher, but I must go and raise him up; and if they kill me my
teacher will come and raise me up and him that is dead likewise.” So Philemon came into
the city, and he met Koros the governor who commanded his guards to kill him. And the
governor said, “Who knoweth whether this man killed the boy who is dead [or not]?” And
the guards went to kill Philemon, and they seized him and hung him up. And Philemon
answered and said unto Koros the governor, “Why dost thou scourge me? I am a little
person who hath done no sin, and torturing ought not to be inflicted upon me. Where is
Andrew my teacher that he may see what they are doing to his disciple?” And he turned
his face to the guards, and said unto them, “Is there anyone among you who is merciful and
will take compassion upon me, and will go to my teacher Andrew and will tell him in what
state I am, how I am scourged and hung up [upon a tree]?” When the guards heard this
they wept because of the sweetness of his voice. And straightway certain birds came and
talked with him as they talked to Noah in days of old, and they said unto him, “Behold,
whatsoever thou wishest from us we will send unto thee.” And a small bird came nigh
unto him, and she said unto him, “I am lighter in body than these [other] birds, and I will
go to thy teacher to bring him to thee.” And Philemon said unto her, “Thou art a whore,
and thou shalt not tempt me. Get thee gone from me, and if thou canst find anyone of thy
kin dwell with her, and return not in a hurry speedily.” And a raven drew nigh unto him
and said unto him, “I will go to him.” And Philemon said unto the raven, “In days of old
when thou wast sent [from the ark] thou didst not return to report to Noah who sent thee
forth, and shall I send thee?” And Philemon called the dove and said unto her, “O
excellent pilgrim, whom God hath named as the gentlest of all the birds who brought news
to Noah, when he was in the ark during the days of the Flood, and whom our father Noah,
the righteous man, blessed, get thee to the country of Leda (Leda) to my teacher Andrew
and tell him to come hither and see his disciple Philemon, whom they have hung upon a
tree to scourge him.” And the dove went and told Andrew and she returned and answered
and said unto Philemon, “Be strong and fear not; behold Andrew is coming and he will
183

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
hear thy word.” When Koros the governor heard this, he rose up quickly and he released
Philemon with his own hands from the scourging, and he believed on our Lord. And Satan
was jealous, and he entered into the heart of the governor’s wife and she killed her sons,
and her slaves returned and seized her, and they told the governor and Philemon. And
Philemon called the dove and sent many messages into the house of the governor [by her].
And when the people heard the dove talking, they were amazed, and they all thronged to
the place where Philemon was. And behold Andrew came and commanded Philemon his
disciple to raise the dead youth, and he prayed to our Lord Christ and raised the young man
from the dead. And they went also into the house of the governor, and Saint Andrew
prayed and made his wife and his sons, who were dead, to live. And the youth who came
to life told everything that had happened [to him] and what he had seen in heaven. And
behold whilst the dove was flying about Andrew’s head and in front of him, the apostle
said unto her, “How many are thy days?” and the dove said unto him, “Sixty years are my
days.” And the blessed Andrew said unto her, “Because thou didst hearken to the voice of
Philemon, my disciple, get thee into the desert, and thou shalt be free from the work of the
men of this world, and no man shall have any authority over thee”; and the dove went forth
into the desert as Andrew commanded. And when the people who were gathered together
saw this, they all believed and were baptized in the Name of the Father and the Son and the
Holy Ghost. Then he went forth from them and departed to the cities of Akrad, and Aksis,
and Akseyas, and Henefores, and after this he departed with Bartholomew to AzriGazrinos; and what happened to him [from the time when he met] the Dog-faces until he
returned is in the knowledge of God [only]. When Saint Andrew had entered that city and
preached to the people thereof, now these men were exceedingly evil, and they would
neither submit nor obey, some of them believed because of the signs and wonders which
they saw [worked] by Saint Andrew. And those who did not believe took counsel with evil
intent against Saint Andrew, and they sent a message to him with deceit asking him to
come, meaning to rise up against him and to kill him. When their messengers came to
Saint Andrew, and heard his good doctrine, and saw his shining face, they believed on our
Lord Christ, and returned to those who had sent them. And there were some who tortured
them, and these belonged to those evil men who had taken counsel together, saying, “We
will rise up and burn him in the fire.” And there gathered together about him many evil
men, and they came to Saint Andrew to kill him. And the blessed man asked Christ that
fire might come down from heaven and consume them, and straightway fire came down
from heaven and burnt them up; and those who were left were exceedingly afraid. And the
report of the blessed Andrew the apostle was heard throughout all that country and many
people believed on our Lord Christ. And the priests of idols saw all these signs and
wonders and did not believe, but they sought out Saint Andrew the apostle in all that
country that they might kill him. Afterwards they gathered together and came and took the
holy Apostle Andrew, and they beat him severely and dragged him round about the city
naked, and they cast him into the prison house, so that they might kill him on the following
day. Now the custom of these people was when they wanted to kill a man to take him and
hang him up on a tree, and stone him until he died. That day Andrew the apostle asked our
Lord Christ that fire might come down upon them from heaven and consume them as it did
before. And our Lord Christ appeared and said unto him, “Be not afraid, be not sorrowful,
be not dismayed, for thy departure from this world is nigh”; and He gave him “Peace,” and
disappeared from him; and the soul of the blessed Andrew the apostle rejoiced. When the
morning came they hung him up upon a tree and stoned him with stones until he died. And
certain believing men came and took the body of the saint and laid it in a grave, and great
184

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
signs and wonders were made manifest. Salutation to thee, O disciple of Jesus, who
preached the Gospel and taught in Nicomedia, and who roused up the country of Leda
(Leda) from the dead.
On this day are commemorated Abba ‘Os and the Virgins, and James, and Zachariah, and
Simon, and Theodora, and Theophana.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 05
(December 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Nahum the prophet. This holy and righteous man was of the tribe of
Simeon, and he was in prophecy the seventeenth from Moses the prophet. This righteous
prophet prophesied in the days of Amos, the son of Yodae and he was also named Iyoas in
the days of Uzza his son. And he rebuked the children of Israel because of their
backsliding and because of their worship of idols, and he revealed in his prophecy that
although God the Most High is merciful and compassionate, and abundant in mercy, yet
will He take vengeance upon His adversaries, and upon those who are His enemies and
heap up judgment for them. And he prophesied concerning the preaching of the Holy
Gospel, and concerning the apostles who should preach it, and he called them “heralds of
good things” and “preachers of peace.” And he prophesied concerning Nineveh and how
waters and fire would destroy it and lay it waste. And it came to pass even as he
prophesied, for God made a great earthquake to take place in it, and a fire broke out in it
and burnt up the half of it, and those who had turned from the path of righteousness and
worked iniquity died. Now upon those who continued steadfast in their repentance before
God no evil whatsoever came. And having finished his prophecy and pleased God by his
work he died in peace. Salutation to him that preached the coming of the God Whose path
from Sina (Sinai) was in the earthquake.
And on this day also Saint Isidore became a martyr. Salutation to Isidore the blessed
martyr.
And on this day also the blessed Eugenia became a martyr. This holy woman came from
Rome, and her father’s name was Philip. there was an emperor in the city of Rome who
was an infidel and worshipped idols, and whose name was Mamdeyanos, and her father
was a worshipper of idols. This holy woman was born in the city of Alexandria and her
mother was a Christian, and taught her the Christian Faith, and when she was grown up
[her father] betrothed her to a great nobleman. When her father told her this she said unto
him, “Permit me first of all to go forth into the desert of Alexandria, and let me open my
eyes, and rejoice in the sight of the monasteries.” When her father heard this he assigned
two eunuchs to her, and permitted her to do what she wished. And she went out into the
desert and traveled about to the monasteries of the monks, and she came to a church where
there was a holy and righteous bishop whose name was Theodore. And when she had
come in to him she told him everything, which was in her heart, and she and her eunuchs
were baptized. And she became a monk there and the abbot called her name “Eugenius,”
185

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
not knowing that she was a woman. When she did not return to her father he searched for
her everywhere, and when he did not find her he made an image in her likeness, and he
continued to worship it evening and morning. After she had dwelt there one year, the
abbot of that religious house died, and the monks chose Eugenius, and appointed her in his
place. And God gave her the gift of healing, and she could cast out devils, and open the
eyes of the blind; and a certain woman who had a devil in her came to her, and Saint
Eugenius healed her. After this Satan cast an evil lust into the heart of a certain woman so
that she spoke to Saint Eugenius, and asked him to abandon his ascetic life and marry her.
And Saint Eugenius hearkened unto her voice and said unto her, “Get thee from me, O my
mother, for Satan hath afflicted thee.” And having been put to shame the woman departed
to the governor of Alexandria, and she said unto him, “When I visited a certain religious
house a young man came unto me by night, a monk, and he wished to put me to shame,
and when I cried out to my slaves and to my handmaidens, he departed from me.” When
the governor, the father of Eugenia, heard this he commanded the soldiers to bring the
monks before him bound in fetters. and when they arrived he handed them over to another
governor to punish in his house, and some of them died. And when Saint Eugenius saw
the miserable condition of the monks she said unto the governor, her father, “O my lord,
swear unto me that if I tell thee the mystery which concerns me that thou wilt not hold me
back from my desire.” And when he had sworn to her she took him into a secret place and
showed him her mystery, and told him her desire and that she was his daughter Eugenia.
When the governor heard this he said unto her, “Art thou indeed Eugenia my daughter? I
will believe in thy God.” And straightway he commanded them to set free the monks and
to bury those who were dead. And her father and her mother and all the men of her house
were baptized in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, One God, and
became Christians. When the men of Alexandria saw the Faith of Philip, they enthroned
him archbishop on the throne of Mark, and he sat for many years, and taught the Faith of
Christ. And another governor, an evil man (or heretic), sent his soldiers to kill Philip
secretly whilst he was praying in church; and they killed him and he became a martyr.
And when the Archbishop of Rome heard the story of Saint Eugenia, he received her into
his house and made her abbess of the religious house which he had built, and which
contained three thousand women, and three hundred nuns who were virgins; and the two
eunuchs who were with her he made bishops of the cities. And the governor seized Saint
Eugenia and tortured her with divers kinds of tortures, and at length she delivered up her
soul and became a martyr, for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise!
Salutation to Theodore and to Eugenia.
And on this day also Saint Victor of the city of Shaw, in the district of Asyut, became a
martyr. The name of the father of this holy man was Marmar, and the name of his mother
was Martha, and they were righteous folk and they served God without fear. Now they
had no son, and they prayed for one continually, and gave large alms to the poor and
needy. And God heard their petition, and that year the blessed woman conceived this
blessed Victor, and she brought him forth on the ninth day of Genbot (May-June); and she
brought him up most carefully and piously in the fear of God. When he was twenty years
old his father took him to the emperor, and the emperor made him a judge in his father’s
stead; now his father was far advanced in years. Then after a few days there arrived the
Edict of the Emperor Diocletian to the governor of Ansna (Asna or Esneh), ordering him to
kill the Christians who would not worship the gods; and the governor himself came to the
city of Shaw, seeking for Christians. And certain men informed against Saint Victor, and
told the governor that he worshipped Christ . . . in sincerity, and the governor forthwith
186

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
ordered his soldiers to bring him to him; and they did so and set him before him. And the
governor tried to force Saint Victor to sacrifice to the gods, and when he refused to do so,
he commanded his soldiers to bind him in fetters in the prison house. And as he was
praying there the angel of the Lord, Saint Michael, came down to him and carried him up
into heaven; and when the keeper of the prison house missed him he was exceedingly
disturbed. And after three days he found him, and took him to the governor who took him
to the Emperor Diocletian, he himself being pitiful and tender-hearted concerning him, so
that he might turn him from the worship of God. And having become weary and being
unable to make Saint Victor consent, he sent him and deposited him with the governor
Eutychianus, saying, “I have sent him to thee. If he offers sacrifice to the gods [good and
well], and if he will not, hesitate not to kill him.” Then the soldiers tied his hands and his
feet, and put an iron gag in his mouth, and he commanded them to put him in the hold of a
ship; and they took him away. Whilst he was there the angel of the Lord came down and
released him from his fetters. Then they brought him before the governor, and the saint
kept silent before the governor as before the wicked emperor; and straightway the governor
was wroth and condemned him to be tortured severely, and chained him in the prison
house. Whilst he was there our Redeemer appeared in a chariot of light, and made a
covenant with him. And from that day the saint performed many signs and miracles, and
healed all the sick. When the governor heard this he was wroth, and commanded his
soldiers to bring him to him, and he treated him kindly and urged him [to worship the
gods]; but the saint reviled him and cursed his filthy gods. And straightway he
commanded them to tie him to a horse’s tail and drag him about for one day, and after that
they threw him into the furnace which heated the baths, and he finished his strife nobly.
Now they could not bring his body out from the bath furnace, so they went down the steps,
and wrapped it up in costly cloths and anointed it with scented unguents and they built a
church over it. Salutation two-fold to Saint Victor.
And on this day also are commemorated Philip, and Ananias, and Barachus, and John, and
Philip, the father of Eugenia the martyr.
Salutation to Eugenia who pretended that she was a eunuch for the sake of Christ, and who
appeared to be like the monks her fellows.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 06
(December 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated Saint Anatolius the priest and martyr.
Anatolius.

Salutation to

And on this day also died the holy father Abba Abraham the Syrian, the sixty-second
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This father was a Christian from the country of the
East, and he was a merchant and had many possessions. He came to Mesr (Cairo) many
times when traveling, and he dwelt there, and there appeared in him many virtues, and he
was merciful to the poor. And the report of his excellence and understanding was noised
187

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
abroad, and the fathers, the bishops, and the elders, and the doctors agreed concerning him,
and they determined to make him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And when he had
been enthroned by the Will of God, he gave all his goods to the poor and needy, and he
suppressed every evil custom from his office, and he threatened to excommunicate all the
bishops if they took any bribes whatsoever in making appointments to the priesthood; and
he excommunicated those who took concubines, and he was wroth with those who had
them. And when those who had concubines heard the excommunication which he
pronounced against them, they feared the banning of the archbishop very greatly, and they
feared God the Most High, and they cast out all their concubines from their houses, and
came to Abba Abraham the archbishop, and bowed down at his feet and repented; and he
accepted their repentance and remitted unto them all their sins. And no man dared to
gainsay the archbishop except a certain man who was a scribe in Mesr (Cairo), and he
feared neither God Most High nor this father. And this father rebuked him many times,
and he bore with him for many days, but although he bowed low before him many times he
would not accept his rebuke, nor turn from his evil way, and he was not afraid lest God
Most High should destroy him. And although he saw a pure and holy old man lying prone
on the ground at his feet, (which ought to have been cut off!), beseeching him to turn from
his evil, and to cast out that concubine from his house, he neither listened to his command
nor turned and forsook his counsel. And even after this the archbishop considered neither
his own learning (?), nor his rebuke, but he humbled himself like Christ his Creator, and he
went to the house of that man. And when that infidel heard of the coming of this father to
his house, he shut the door, and this father remained for two hours standing at the door of
that evil man and knocking at it; and the man neither opened the door to him nor spoke one
word. And when this father heard that the wretched man had separated himself from the
community, and was alone, and that of his own free will he had perished from the flock of
Christ, and that all his members were rotten, than and then only, not because of the sin
which he had committed against this father, but in order that the rest of the members of his
flock might not be corrupted, this father rightly decided to cut him away from his
congregation, and to set his blood on his own head, and he excommunicated him, and
shook off the dust from the sandals on his feet at the door of the house of that unclean man.
And God made manifest at that moment a sign in the presence of the men who were there,
for the framework of the door and the large stone were split asunder and became two parts.
What an awful and marvelous thing was this! When the massive, solid stone heard the
excommunication of this father it split asunder. And the fate, which came upon this man
who was full of sin, was not tender, for God worked grievous signs upon that man, and he
became the poorest of the poor. And He removed him from his position in disgrace, and of
all his possessions he had not left to him one sarik (i.e. farthing); and God afflicted his
body with serious illness, and [the soldiers] cut off his hands in the days of Hakim the
Khalifah. And he became a spectacle unto all men, and many sinners were afraid when
they saw an evil death come upon him, and they repented. And in the days of this holy
father, Me’ez (Al-Mu’izz) the Khalifah of Mesr (Cairo), the captain of his host was a
certain Jew who embraced with him the Muslim Faith, and he became like unto the
Muslims; and that captain had a friend, a Jew, who used to come with him frequently and
hold converse with the khalifah. And when that Jew found favor with the khalifah,
because of his friendship with the captain of the host of the khalifah, he made a request to
the khalifah, and he said unto him, “I very much wish that thou wouldst bring the
archbishop to me so that I might have an argument with him.” And the khalifah sent and
brought this father, and with him was Severus, the son of Makfue, Bishop of the city of
188

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Eshmunen. And they disputed with that Jew, and vanquished him in argument and put him
to shame. When the khalifah saw this he rejoiced, and he was pleased with the archbishop
and those who were with him, and paid them honor and they departed to their houses in
peace. And the captain of the host and that Jew friend were ashamed, and they were
seeking to kill the archbishop and all the Christians. One day the captain of the host came
to the khalifah and said unto him, “I would have thee to know, O my lord, that the
Christians have no Faith, for it saith in their Gospel, ‘If there be in you faith as large as a
mustard-seed, and ye say to this mountain, Depart and fall into the sea, it shall depart from
this world.’” And when the khalifah heard this he sent and brought the Archbishop Abba
Abraham, and he said unto him, “What hast thou to say to the words in your Gospel which
saith, ‘If there be in you faith as large as a mustard-seed, and ye say to this mountain
Depart, and it shall depart’?” And the Archbishop said unto him, “Yea, it is true, the
Gospel doth say this” (Matthew xvii, 20). And the khalifah said unto him, “Behold, there
are thousands and tens of thousands of thousands of you Christians in whom there is faith.
I wish you to bring to me one of your number to make manifest this sign to me with his
own hand, not thyself who art the head of the Christian people, though it would be seemly
for thee to make manifest this sign unto me with thine own hand.” When the archbishop
heard these words he was dismayed and feared exceedingly, and he said unto the khalifah,
“Wait three days,” and he replied, “Let it be according as thou sayest.” And the
archbishop went out from before the khalifah, and he gathered together the archbishops,
and the bishops and the priests, and the monks who lived near him, and they sat in the
church of the holy Lady of us all, the Virgin Mary, in Mu’Allakah in Mesr (Cairo) for
three days and three nights, fasting, and praying, and making supplication to God. On the
third night, at dawn, our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, appeared unto Abba
Abraham with a bright and joyful face, and she said unto the archbishop, “What is it that
hath come upon thee?” And she said unto him, “Fear not, I have accepted all thy tears
which thou hast shed in my church, and now rise up, and get thee out into the ‘street of
iron’ which leads into the market, and there thou shalt find a one-eyed man bearing a pot of
water on his shoulders, lay hold upon him, for he shall make manifest this sign unto thee.
And the name of this man is Simon, and he is a shoe-maker, and he put out his eye through
the command of my Beloved Son Jesus Christ.” And the archbishop rose up and went
quickly, and he found the man, and laid hold upon him, and he said unto him, “Have mercy
on the Christian folk.” And he told him how our holy Lady the Virgin Mary had appeared
unto him, and how she had told him about him. And Simon bowed down before him and
said unto him, “Forgive me, O my father, I am a sinful man and a transgressor, and I
cannot do what thou tellest me, but God’s Will be done. By the prayer of our holy Lady
the Virgin Mary and by thine own prayer thou shalt help the Christian people. But I
beseech thee, O my father, not to reveal my work unto any man, for I have not strength
enough to bear this world’s honor; but what I say unto thee do. Get thee out to the
mountain about which the khalifah spoke unto thee, with thy priests, and let thy people be
with thee, and take with thee the Gospels, and the crosses, and the censers, and candles.
And let the khalifah and his soldiers and all the people stand on one side, and do thou and
thy people stand on the other side. And I will stand behind thee among the people and
none will know me, and let them entreat God, and say, and cry out, ‘Kiryalayson,’ that is
to say, ‘God have mercy upon us, Christ,’ one and forty times, and then command thy
people to hold their peace. Then do thou bow down, and let all the people bow down, and
I myself will bow down with thee. And do this three times, at the same time making the
sign of the Life-giving Cross before that mountain.” When the archbishop heard this, he
189

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
took the bishops, and the priests, and the monks, and the believing people, and came to the
khalifah. And the khalifah and his soldiers went out, and with them were all the people of
Mesr (Cairo) and Kahera (Cairo), and they made haste to that mountain, and the
Archbishop Abba Abraham and the believing men stood on one side, and the khalifah and
his soldiers and all his men on the other side. Then the archbishop and the believing men
prayed, and Simon with them, and they cried out, saying, “Lord have mercy upon us” one
and forty times. And when they had bowed down three times, now at each time the
archbishop lifted up his eyes to heaven, and made the sign of the Cross, the mountain
moved itself and rose up in the air before all the people. And when the archbishop and all
the believing people bowed down, the mountain descended to its place [again]; and thus he
did three times. And when the khalifah and his soldiers and all the Muslims saw this sign
and wonder, they marveled exceedingly, and they cried out loudly and were afraid with a
great fear. And the Khalifah brought the archbishop Abba Abraham, and honored him
greatly, and asked him to demand from him whatsoever he wished, but he had no need to
ask him for anything whatsoever. And when the khalifah pressed the archbishop, the
archbishop said unto him, “I wish to build some churches, and especially a church [in
honor of] Saint Mercurius in Mesr (Cairo).” And the khalifah commanded him to build
what churches he wanted, and besides this he gave him money from his palace, and paid
him reverence. And the archbishop said unto him, “May God lengthen thy days upon
earth, and make strong thy kingdom; for myself I do not want money.” And when he said
this to him the khalifah loved him exceedingly, for he saw his righteousness proceeding
from him in his rejection of the goods of this world. Then the khalifah leaped upon his
horse and [departed] with his soldiers and he stood by the side of the archbishop at the
building of the church of Saint Mercurius, when certain evil men would have prevented
him building the church, and he stayed with him until he had finished building the church
of Saint Mercurius, and many other churches in the country of Egypt. And having fought a
good fight, and pleased God, he died in peace, having sat upon the throne of Mark the
evangelist for three years and six months. And one saith in the story of the life of this
father that the scribe whom he excommunicated because of his concubines concocted
poison and poisoned himself and he died. And this saint departed to God Whom he loved,
and all the people mourned for him. Salutation to Abraham the merchant and archbishop.
Salutation to Simon who was instructed by the mouth of Mary.
And on this day also is commemorated the consecration of the church of Saint ‘Arsima, the
virgin and martyr, and the translation of her body, and of the bodies of the holy martyrs
who were with her; now these were six and twenty holy martyrs. And King Tiridates said
unto her, “Hath thy heart no desire to live as long as thou canst with us?” And she said
unto him, “My desire for heaven, which is better, is greater.” And he commanded his
soldiers to take her to the fore part of the tent and to strip her naked there, and to cut off her
head; and they cut off her head and she received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom
of the heavens. Salutation to the translation of the body of ‘Arsima.
And on this day also are commemorated Batelsis the priest, and Abraham Soreyawi, the
second, who was a carpenter, and a Christian, and Ta’Amani, and Sufit, and Meryan, and
Michael, and Yolsawis and Ptolemy.
Salutation to Elyab a pagan on whom God showed compassion. [This salutation is omitted
in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
190

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TAHISAS 07
(December 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Abba Daniel of Dabra Sihat (monastery of Scete?), the monastery of
Abba Macarius. This holy man buried the Empress Patricia, who called herself ‘Anteyos,
and it was not known that she was woman until after her death. One day he was going
with his disciple to Alexandria, and when the turn of the evening had come, he found a
fool (or madman) whose name was Marka, and many idiots (?) were following him; now
the men of the city thought they were madmen. And Abba Daniel took his hand and
brought him to the archbishop, and described to him his virtues, and when they had made
him take an oath he told them that he had fled from the war of fornication, and that he had
feigned to be a madman; and when they heard this they glorified God. One day he came
into a certain city and he found an old man whose name was Eulogius, and who was a
worker in stone; and he bought bread and welcomed the poor. And he brought Abba
Daniel into his house, and welcomed him with joy, and when Daniel saw his goodness, he
asked God to give money to Eulogius, so that he might be able to welcome the poor. And
our Lord appeared unto Daniel in the form of a child, and said unto him, “Wilt thou
undertake his duties, and let him change his mode of life, or shall I undertake them?” And
then Eulogius found a pot of gold, and he went to the emperor and was appointed a
governor, and he abandoned his old habit of life. And Abba Daniel heard in the city of the
emperor that he (i.e. the emperor) had rebuked him, and that his soldiers had beaten
Eulogius and brought him nigh unto death; [and the emperor ordered them to crucify him].
And whilst he was sorrowing over this matter that child appeared unto him in a dream, and
said unto him, “Why hast thou entered into the affair of another?” Then our Lady Mary
came and kissed the feet of the child and delivered Eulogius. As for Eulogius, when
another emperor reigned he wished to kill him, and Eulogius took to flight, and having
arrived in the city, he returned to his former work. And one day when they were
journeying along the road by the light of the moon, he found a woman on a hill, and her
hair covered her whole body, and she had dwelt there for eight and thirty years, carrying on
the spiritual fight, and she told him all her secret history and died. And one day they
brought the Book of the Letters of Leo and read it before all the people, and Abba Daniel
leaped up and rent the book and cursed the Faith of Chalcedon; and when the soldiers
heard of this they beat him severely, and drove him away from his monastery. One day he
was going to visit some virgins, and he knocked at the door, and they knew that he was
Abba Daniel, and they opened the door to him and welcomed him with joy; and among
them was one who made herself out to be mad, and she lay by the door [and moved not].
And Abba Daniel asked about her, and the abbess said, “She is mad”; and Abba Daniel
told her that she was a holy woman and a spiritual fighter. And during the night she wrote
a letter, saying, “Forgive me because I made you angry”; and having said this she
disappeared; and when the [other] virgins heard of this they were exceeding sorry and
repented. And there was a nunnery wherein very many virgins dwelt, and its gates were
strong, and Satan raised up against them certain thieves to plunder their goods. And the
captain of the thieves said, “I will disguise myself as Abba Daniel, and they will open the
door to me forthwith”; and he did even as he had thought. And he said unto the virgins, “I
am Abba Daniel,” and when the nuns heard him they welcomed him with joy, and
uncovered their faces. And as soon as one of the nuns, who was blind, washed her face in
191

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
water her eyes were opened; and when the nuns saw this they said, “Blessed art thou, O
Abba Daniel!” When the captain of the thieves saw this he repented, and became a monk
with Abba Daniel. And Abba Daniel continued to fight strenuously, and when the time for
his departure drew nigh the angel of the Lord told him, and he fell sick a little; and he
prayed to Christ and died in peace. Salutation to Daniel, the head of the blessed priesthood
of Dabra Sihat (monastery of Scete ?).
And on this day also is commemorated the blessed woman Diyonteres (Diontyras).
Salutation to Diyonteres (Diontyras).
And on this day also died the holy and glorious father and fighter Abba Matewos
(Matthew) of ‘Asfoni, Archimandrite of Dabra ‘Aswan. And this holy man was reared
from his youth up in the fear of God, and he became a monk in a certain monastery, and he
fought with fasting and with prayer. And he built himself an abode in the desert, and he
worked with his hands and made good nets, and the price he received for the same he gave
in alms to the poor, according to what his disciples have said about his work, and his
fighting, and his miracles. Now these disciples Abba Serapion, and Abba Khadra relate as
follows: One day when we were sitting outside his abode in the desert, we heard a voice
like that of a man who is speaking to his friend inside the abode; and when we went inside
we found no one there except our father, who was alone. And we said, “O our father, we
outside heard someone talking with thee, but having come inside we find no one but thee.”
And he said unto us with very great humility and exceedingly great sweetness, “O my
children, I remember my sins, and I talk to myself, and remind my soul of the punishments
which are not transient, and the pain of the death which shall find me. Woe be unto poor
Matewos (Matthew) when they strip off the apparel which is on him, and set him before
the throne of the Living God, in the midst of the ladder of the heavenly angels, and all the
company of the righteous, who keep purity, which they put on as if it were a garment.”
With words such as these did he exhort his children and he reminded them of the
punishment of sinners and the reward of the righteous. And Saint Abuna Abba Matewos
(Matthew) made his prayers, and carried on his fight, and his service in the monastery
which he had built and dedicated to our father Abba Pachomius, and the monastery of
Dabra Bakalt. And Satans and unclean spirits used to [try to] terrify him by day and by
night, and he saw them face to face, and they would run in front of him and follow behind
him everywhere, and each one of them would change his appearance, but our father was
not afraid of them. And when he stretched out his hands, and made the sign of the Cross
with them, at that very moment the devils would melt away and be dispersed like smoke
before the wind. One day he commanded Serapion his disciple to take from the monastery
to his cell a skin of water and a little bread and to wait there until the following day whilst
he went on a certain business into the desert. When his disciple came to the cell and
opened the door to go in he saw two wild beasts that were larger than hyenas, and very
terrifying, lying in the middle of the dwelling, and being afraid he shut the door of brass.
And behold our father came walking through the desert, and when he saw his disciple he
laughed and he said unto him, “O Serapion, why didst thou not go into the dwelling [and
wait there] until I came to thee?” And Serapion said unto him, “O my father, I found
inside the dwelling two [wild beasts] lying, and I was afraid of them, and I did not go in.”
And the old man who was gentle and pure in deed and soul, answered and said unto him,
“Believe me, O my son, for twelve years I have lived with them, and I myself have served
them, and this bread and water which I commanded thee to bring here is for them.” And
when he opened the door the two wild beasts came to him, and they licked the soles of the
192

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
feet of the holy man, and they treated him with the greatest friendliness and were in
submission to him; and the saint poured out some water for them from the skin, and they
lapped it up and went out through the door and departed into the desert. And this Abba
Matewos (Matthew) continued to work miracles until the report of him was in every place.
And the people used to bring unto him sick folk who were suffering from divers kinds of
sicknesses, and he healed them by means of the great power of God, which was with him.
Here is the First Miracle. One day they brought unto him a dumb man who was possessed
of a devil, and as soon as he saw the saint, the devil cried out with a loud voice and cast the
man upon the ground. And the saint prayed over some oil, and made the sign of the Holy
Cross over him, in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, One God; and
straightway the man was delivered from this Satan, and his heart returned to him, and he
heard the words of the saint, and he departed rejoicing. And when certain of the laity came
to Abba Matewos (Matthew) and offered him a table (i.e. a meal), he sent them away in
peace. And having taken a little of that “blessing” into their houses, when they laid it upon
those who were sick, they were healed immediately, and they glorified God. The Second
Miracle. One day they brought unto him a very beautiful maiden who was possessed of
the devil, and very often she rent her garments, and no man could approach her, and her
parents were in sore trouble about her. And Abba Matewos (Matthew) cried out and
prayed over the oil of the lamp, and he anointed the maiden therewith in the Name of
Christ, and she was healed. Third Miracle. One day they brought unto him a sinful
woman who had fallen into great sin, and who was very wicked, and being with child, and
the day of her delivery having arrived, her labor was hard, and she suffered tribulation by
day and by night. And the saint said unto her, “My daughter, confess thy sin unto me, and
lie not before God.” And she said unto him, “I was in the habit of lying with two brothers
without knowing which of them was with me; and having conceived, by means of my
drugs I made myself to abort the child, and I gave him to the dogs.” When the saint heard
this he prayed to God, and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed her up, and she
became an example to other women. This saint worked very many miracles, but if one
tried to recount them he would never come to an end. One day as he was walking in the
desert, a hyena tugged at his garment with her teeth, and she showed him her cub, which
had fallen into a hole; and when the saint had drawn it out for her she crouched and licked
the soles of his feet and departed. And when the time of his death drew nigh he saw a
vision on the second day of the month of Takhshash, and it seemed that they invited him to
the assembly at the feast of the Holy Fathers, Abba Anthony, and Abba Macarius, and
Abba Pachomius, and Abba Theodore, and Abba Moses the Black, and Saint Abba Sinoda,
and they said unto him, “Good is thy coming unto us to dwell with us in the Jerusalem of
the heavens.” And they brought him to the door of the Great Hall wherein are gardens and
seats, and he heard a voice, saying, “Open the door so that Matewos (Matthew) may come
in.” And then he died and received three crowns. Salutation to Matewos (Matthew).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

193

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TAHISAS 08
(December 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Yarokla (Hieroclis), the thirteenth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. The parents of this holy man were deniers of Christ, but after his birth
they believed and were baptized with Christian baptism; before they believed they taught
their son every kind of pagan philosophy and learning, and all their books, and after they
believed they taught him Christian learning, and he learned by heart the Books of the
Church and of the Apostles. After this Demetrius the archbishop made him a deacon, and
then he made him a priest in the church of the city of Alexandria, and he protected and
cared well for his flock, and fulfilled the work and the Law of the Church. When Abba
Demetrius died [the bishops] chose this father, and made him Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria, and he shepherded the flock of Christ well, and made them strong in the True
Faith; and he converted many pagans and brought them into the Faith of Christ, and
baptized them with Christian baptism; but he committed to Saint Dionysius the work of
judging between believers. And Saint Yarokla (Hieroclis) taught them, and rebuked them,
and converted the heretics and guided them until he brought them back and made them to
enter the True Faith. And he sat upon the throne of Saint Mark the evangelist for thirteen
years, and he died in peace. Salutation to the blessed Yarokla (Hieroclis).
And on this day also became martyrs the holy women Barbara and Juliana, and ‘Anba
Merena (Abba Marina), the righteous man. This holy woman Barbara was the daughter of
a judge, who was exceedingly great in the palace, and he lived in the days of the infidel
Diocletian; he came from the country of the East and his name was Dioscurus. And
Dioscurus made for his daughter a strong palace so that no one should ever see her; and he
commanded [the builders] to make two windows, which would open in the bathhouse, and
they did so. And when Saint Barbara saw the two windows she commanded the builders to
make a third window, [and they did so] and then she made over the bath, with the water in
it, the sign of the Life-giving Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. When her father came into
the dwelling he saw what the builders had done, and that they had transgressed his
command. And he asked them about this, and they said unto him, “Thy daughter Barbara
commanded us [to do] this and we did it.” When he asked her, “Why hast thou done this?”
she said unto him, “Know, O my father, that everything is completed in the Holy Trinity,
and I have made three windows in the Name of the Holy Trinity. And this cross is a copy
of the Cross-of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein was the salvation of the whole world. Turn,
O my father, from thy error, and worship thy God Who created thee,” When her father
heard these words he was wroth, he drew his sword and ran after her, but she fled from
him; and there was a rock in front of her, and that rock split and she entered into it and was
protected. And after this she returned and her father took her and handed her over to the
governor, who tortured her severely. And there was there a certain woman whose name
was Juliana, and she was looking at Saint Barbara when she was being tortured, and she
wept for her. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared to Saint Barbara and strengthened and
comforted her. And after this her father commanded his men to cut off her head, and the
head of Juliana, and they cut off the heads of both of them with the sword, and the two
women received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens; and fire came down
from heaven and burnt up her father and Marcianus, the governor. And the bath which
194

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Saint Barbara had made for herself in the bathhouse, and on which was the sign of the
Cross, became a means of healing unto the sick, for all those who bathed therein were
healed of their diseases. Then [certain believers] took the bodies of the holy martyrs and
laid them in the church outside the city which is called Galalya; and the bodies of these
holy women and martyrs are this day in the church of Saints ‘Abuker and John the martyr
in the city of Mesr (Cairo). Salutation to Barbara. Salutation to him that made strong her
mind, namely ‘Anba Merena.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Samuel, Abbot of the monastery of
Kalmon. This holy man was one of the men of the city of Dakreluba, in the country of
Masil, in the north of Egypt; his parents were holy and pure, and they had no child except
Samuel. His father was a priest called Silas, and he saw a vision one night. And a man
with a shining face said unto him, “Needs must; and thy son shall become a true and
excellent teacher of God all the days of his life.” Now this Samuel was pure from his
youth up, like Samuel the Prophet, and he was always thinking in his heart about the garb
of the monastic life. One day he found the opportunity and went forth from his father to go
to the desert of Scete, and as he was journeying along the road, the angel of the Lord,
disguised as a monk, said unto him, “Whither goest thou?” And Abba Samuel said unto
him, “I want to go to the monastery of Scete.” And the angel who had appeared unto him
in the form of a monk said unto him, “I am going there,” and they traveled together until
they arrived in the desert of Scete. And the angel of the Lord delivered him to a certain
elder monk whose name was Agathon, and who dwelt in a cave, and was a very righteous
man. And the angel of the Lord told Saint Abba Agathon about Abba Samuel, and he said
unto him, “Receive Samuel with joy, and array him in the garb of the monastic life; for he
shall be thy son in truth, and he shall strengthen thine old age, and thou shalt teach him all
the rules of the monastic life.” And when the angel had said this to Abba Agathon, he
disappeared from him. And when Abba Samuel came Abba Agathon received him with
great joy, and said unto him, “Good is thy coming to me, O Samuel, thou man of God, for
God hath sent thee to me in mine old age.” And forthwith he took him into the church
with him, and he blessed the cloak made of cloth of hair, and the girdle, and the cap, and
the garment of the monk, and put them on him, saying, “The God of the holy fathers, Abba
Anthony and Abba Macarius, be with thee, my son Samuel, and be a helper unto thee in all
thy tribulation.” And Saint Abba Agathon taught Abba Samuel humility and silence, and
he was saying always, “Forgive me, O my father, show me kindness and guide me.” And
he bowed before Abba Agathon and said unto him, “Remember me, O my holy and
blessed father, so that God may make me to do His Will”; and Saint Abba Samuel learned
from Abba Agathon all the path of spiritual monasticism, and Saint Abba Agathon assisted
him in everything. And Abba Samuel lived with the elder Abba Agathon for three years,
and he did everything, which he commanded him to do. Then Abba Agathon died, and
Abba Samuel continued to fast for a week at a time, and to fight a great fight. And he was
appointed priest in the church of Saint Abba Macarius in Scete. After a few days they
brought the volume of Letters of Leo of Chalcedon to the desert, and one read them to him.
And when the elder monks heard this they were exceedingly sorry, and Abba Samuel
became zealous, with a great zeal of the Holy Spirit, and he rose up among all the men and
seized that unclean volume, and rent it in pieces, saying, “Cursed is every one who shall
change the Faith of the holy Fathers.” And when the imperial envoy saw this he was filled
with fury, and was exceedingly angry, and he commanded his men to beat the saint with
rods of iron, and to hang him up by his arms, and to smite his face; and they did all these
things and smote his face even as the envoy commanded. And whilst they were smiting
195

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
his face one of his eyes was torn out, and then the emperor commanded them to drive him
away from the monastery of Scete. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto Saint Abba
Samuel and commanded him to depart and to dwell in the monastery of Kalmon; and he
departed straightway and dwelt there, and he lived there a few days teaching all the men to
be strong in the True Faith. And Makakaz, who was governor and Archbishop of the city
of Alexandria, and of all the land of Egypt, heard the report of him, and he came to Saint
Abba Samuel, and he beat him very severely and drove him out of the monastery, and the
saint went and dwelt in the church in the desert of Kalmon. And in those days the pagan
Barbarians came and took him away in order to send him to their own country, and he
besought our Lord Jesus Christ to deliver him from them. And straightway they set him
upon a camel, but that camel was unable to move at all, and then they beat him very
severely; and they agreed to together to leave him, and they departed to their country. And
Abba Samuel returned to Kalmon his monastery, and he lived there and devoted himself to
asceticism and to the spiritual strife of the path of the monastic life. Then the Barbarians
came a second time, and he was afraid of them, and he heard a voice, saying, “Fear not, O
Samuel, but go into the church and hold no converse with them, and I will cause them not
to see thee,” and he remained thus. Then the pagan Barbarians arrived and went into the
church with their swords drawn and grasped tightly in their hands, and they had their
[other] weapons of war with them; and they cried out with outcries which were
exceedingly terrifying. And the saint saw them committing sacrilege in the sanctuary, and
he was unable to bear the sight of their audacity in the sanctuary, and spoke unto them,
saying, “What are ye doing, O ye wicked heretics who have no Lord God to redeem you,
according to the evil of your deeds?” And those pagans said unto him, “Dost thou remain
here [and think] we cannot see thee?” And they seized him and tied him firmly to a pillar
in the church, and they beat him very severely until he was will nigh dead; and when he
was about to die they released him from his bonds and he fell upon his face on the ground
and lay there like a dead man. Then the pagans dragged him out, and brought him to the
place where the camels were, and they beat him on his head with their sandals, and they
fastened him tightly on the back of a camel, but the camel would not move although they
beat it severely; and Saint Abba Samuel wept bitter tears because of his pain. And the
camel turned to him and said unto him with the voice of a man who talketh, “It is well that
they beat thee. It was meet for thee to die because thou didst transgress the command of
the Lord thy God Who told thee to hold thy peace and to speak not.” When Saint Abba
Samuel heard these words he wept bitter tears and said, “Verily I have sinned, but God is
able to put away my transgression.” And then the Barbarians took him to their own
country. Now they had already carried away into captivity Abba John, Abbot of the desert
of Scete, and Abba John and Abba Samuel met there and they comforted each other. And
the master of Abba Samuel wished to force him to worship the sun, but he would not obey
his command in any way. Then he tied the leg of Abba Samuel to the leg of a maiden with
Satanic intent, and sent them out into the desert to attend to the camels. Now his master
thought that Saint Abba Samuel would fall into sin with her, and that he would submit to
everything which he told him; and Diabolus was the counselor of this man. And in all
these things strength was increased in Saint Abba Samuel, and his heart was strong, and he
remained thus until his master fell ill and was nigh to die; and Abba Samuel prayed over
him and healed him of his sickness. And the report of him was noised abroad in that
country, and whosoever was sick came to him, and he prayed over him, and anointed him
with oil, and the sick man was healed of his sickness. When Abba Samuel’s master saw
this he marveled exceedingly, and bowed before him and said unto him, “Forgive me my
196

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
sin which I committed against thee”; and he loved him greatly and he asked him, saying,
“Tell me everything thou wishest, and I will perform it for thee.” And Abba Samuel said
unto him, “I wish to go back to my own country”; and straightway the pagan made ready
many gifts, and he set him on his way in peace, and he departed, and the pagan sent
messengers to go with him until he arrived at his monastery. And his sons gathered
together about him, and they increased in number exceedingly until they became
thousands. And our holy Lady Mary, the Virgin two-fold, the God-bearer, appeared unto
him, and she said unto him, “This place shall be my abode for ever”; and from that day the
pagans never came to the monastery of Saint Abba Samuel. And this father composed
many discourses, and he prophesied concerning the coming of the Muslims, who are the
children of Hagar, and their kingdom, and the tribulation which thou would inflict upon
Christian folk in all countries. When the time for his departure from this fleeting world
drew nigh, he gathered together his sons and he commanded them to be strong in the fear
of God, and to perform His behests, and to fight for Him and for the True Faith until the
last breath. Then he fell sick of a slight sickness, and he died in peace, and inherited the
kingdom of the heavens. It is said concerning him that one of his sons died, and that when
Saint Abba Samuel came to him, his soul returned to him and he rose up, and he told Abba
Samuel and all the brethren how he had seen the punishment of sinners, and the repose of
the righteous; and that brother turned and lay down, and died in peace. Salutation to Abba
Samuel of Kalmon.
And on this day Saint Abba ‘Esi and his sister Thecla became martyrs. This holy man was
on of the men of the city Bedir in the West, in the district of ‘Eshmunayn; and he had
many goods and possessions in abundance, and estates and flocks and herds. He gave the
hair of his flocks to the poor and needy, and he gave large alms to those who were in want;
he feared God exceedingly, and his goods multiplied very greatly. His sister Thecla also
feared God. The name of his father was Elias and the name of his mother was Mary. And
they asked their son ‘Esi, saying, “O our son, we want to have thee married during our
lifetime, and to rejoice in thee before our death”; but he did not wish this by any means,
and he said unto them, “Pray ye for me, O my blessed father and mother. Everything else
which ye command me to do I will undertake gladly, but this thing I cannot do, and do not
speak to me about it.” And they left him alone and spoke no more to him about marriage,
for they loved him very much. And then his father died, being eighty years of age, and in
that same year Diocletian the infidel commanded that all the Christians should worship
idols. And Saint Abba ‘Esi went to the city of Alexandria to buy goods, and he had in that
city a friend whose name was Paul, who was grievously sick, and Abba ‘Esi remained with
him until he recovered from his sickness. And in those days the Christian peoples suffered
very great tribulation, and Abba ‘Esi and Paul his friend used to buy good food and
provisions and take them to the saints who were in the city of Alexandria, and they used
likewise to visit frequently those who were shut up in prison in great tribulation for the
sake of the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and comfort them. And these men used to
minister unto them like slaves, and the saints prophesied to them, saying, “Assuredly ye
shall received the crown of martyrdom.” And in those days they brought Saint Victor, the
son of Romanus, to the city of Alexandria. And when Abba ‘Esi and Thecla his sister saw
the jealousy of him which existed, now he had rejected the royalty of this fleeting world,
Abba ‘Esi drew nigh unto the governor. And confessed our Lord Jesus Christ. And the
governor commanded his soldiers to torture him with severe tortures, and to beat him many
times with whips. And they hacked off his limbs with hatchets, and they set lighted
torches on his body, and they wound red-hot chains about his body, and they lighted a
197

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
huge fire in the furnace of an oven, the flames whereof rose to a great height, and they cast
Abba ‘Esi into that fire. And he prayed, saying, “Thou didst deliver the Three Children
from the fiery furnace, and Daniel from the jaws of the lions, O my Lord Jesus Christ, and
thy martyr Victor from the flame in the furnace of the baths, O my Lord, help me and
deliver me, and send thine angel to deliver me from this torture, for Thine is the glory for
ever and ever Amen.” And when he had said these words, behold Suri’el, the angel, came
down from heaven, and he stood by the right hand of Abba ‘Esi the virgin, and he said
unto him, “Peace be unto thee, O righteous man, Abba ‘Esi, fear not, for God is with thee,
and He shall deliver thee from all thy tribulation.” And straightway the fiery furnace
became like cool dew, and the angel split asunder the walls of the furnace, and he seized
the hand of Saint Abba ‘Esi and brought him out there from, safe and uninjured. And
straightway Saint Abba ‘Esi went to the governor and cried out, saying, “Be ashamed, O
governor, thou and thy infidel emperor, and thy filthy idols.” And when the people saw
Saint Abba ‘Esi alive and uninjured they marveled exceedingly and cried out with one
voice, saying, “We are Christians, and we believe in the God of Abba ‘Esi,” and the
soldiers cut off their heads and they received crowns of martyrdom. Then the governor
commanded them to take Saint Abba ‘Esi to the prison house, and they did as the governor
commanded. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto his sister Thecla, and commanded
her to go to the city of Alexandria to visit her brother. And she rose up in the city of
Antinoe and came to the river, and searched for a boat but could not find one, but a spirit
boat appeared, and she embarked in it, and our holy Lady Mary, the two-fold Virgin, the
God-bearer, was in that boat, and Elisabeth her kinswoman, and they comforted the sister
of Abba ‘Esi. And Elisabeth said unto her, “I had an only son, and they cut off his head
wrongfully,” and the other said unto her, “I had an only Son, and they crucified and slew
Him through envy.” Now Thecla did not know who they were, and she did not think that
what had appeared unto her was merely a vision. And straightway she arrived in
Alexandria, and then she knew that what had appeared unto her was a vision. And she
asked questions about her brother Abba ‘Esi, and they brought her to the prison, and she
entered therein. And when she saw [him] she and he rejoiced with very great joy, and they
agreed together to become martyrs. And when it was midnight Suri’el, the angel of the
Lord, appeared unto Saint Abba ‘Esi, and took him on his shining wings by the command
of God and carried him up into heaven, and showed him the city of God, Jerusalem, which
is in the heavens, and all the saints went forth to meet him and to salute him. And the
angel also showed him the habitation of the righteous and the martyrs, who labored for the
Name of Christ, and he saw Jerusalem, the Great City, whereof the greatness, and glory,
and beauty, and the appearances of its spaces the tongue of man is unable to describe. The
decorations thereof are of gold and silver and precious stones; in it is a light which is
brighter than the sun a million times. And the angel of God took him and showed him an
exceedingly great chamber wherein were three hundred pillars of marble, and the
decorations of the chamber were of gold, and silver, and precious stones. And in that
chamber were one hundred guards, and they were decorated and girded with girdles of
gold, and each of them was five cubits in height, and the like of them existed not in the
world. And he said unto the angel, “Who [built] this great chamber? For there is no man in
the world who could build a chamber like unto this.” And the angel said unto him, “O my
brother, Abba ‘Esi, if all the kings of the earth were to gather together, with all their
wealth, they could not buy one of the pillars which is in this chamber”, and as I looked, I
marveled and I praised God. And I said unto the angel, “O my lord, unto whom doth this
great, and beautiful, and glorious chamber belong?: And the angel said unto me, “All this
198

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
hath been given unto Victor, the son of Romanus, the general, who rejected the sovereignty
of this fleeting world, and all its delights, and who bore the cross of his death and who
followed his Lord. Therefore did our Lord Jesus Christ give unto him this great and neverending sovereignty instead of the sovereignty of this fleeting world.” And I said unto him,
“My lord, I wish thee to inform me what these thrones are, and what are these trees with
the beautiful fruit, and what are these shining crowns?” And the angel answered and said
unto me, “All this place is the rest and joy which God hath prepared for those who
celebrate the commemoration of the holy martyrs upon the earth; hearken now that I may
tell thee--Whosoever shall build a church in the names of the holy martyrs, or shall bury
their bodies, or make an offering of the fruits of his labor on the day of their
commemoration, or light a lamp, or feed the poor, or buy a book for their church, or write a
book of the fight and martyrdom, or do good deeds on the day of the commemoration
according to his ability, and even if a man cannot do these things and can only give a cup
of cold water he shall not lose his reward, and his reward shall be in heaven, saith our Lord
in the Holy Gospel. And when the man who hath been wont to celebrate the
commemoration of one of the martyrs, or one of the righteous, dieth, that martyr or that
righteous man shall come before our Lord Christ, and he shall say unto Him, ‘O my Lord
and God, give me this soul, for it was wont to celebrate my commemoration when upon
earth’; and He will give that soul unto him straightway. And if that soul be that of a great
sinner, a voice shall go forth from God, the Sustainer of the Universe, in the face of
Michael, the archangel, saying, ‘God, the Sustainer of the Universe, hath commanded,
saying, “Let alone this soul, cast it to the martyr that he may make intercession for it, and
let it be given unto him as a gift from the Lord God.”’ And they shall do unto that soul as
God commanded, and it shall be given unto the martyr or unto the righteous man, and the
martyr shall take it and carry it to his abode. And He will command that that soul shall be
washed and arrayed in beautiful apparel, and made to sit upon one of the thrones which ye
see, and crowned with an incorruptible crown; and it shall rejoice with all the saints and
live for ever.” After he had told me these things, that angel of light took me upon his
wings and brought me into the prison house, and he saluted me and went up into heaven;
and I marveled greatly at the great gift which God giveth unto those who fight for His holy
Name. And in the morning the governor commanded his soldiers to bring him out of the
prison house, and they brought him out, and his sister was with them. And he tortured
them severely on the wheel, and with burnings with fire, and with iron nails, and they
flayed their heads; but the Lord raised them up whole and uninjured. When the
executioners were weary of torturing them, the governor handed them on to the governor
of the city of Antinoe in Upper Egypt, so that he might send them away thither. When
they had sailed for a period of twenty days, the boat stopped by the river bank, and the
governor commanded his men to cut off the heads of the saints Abba ‘Esi and Thecla his
sister. And the saints rejoiced exceedingly, and they prayed, and after they had finished
their prayer the soldiers cut off their heads with a sword, and they received crowns of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And God commanded a certain priest whose
name was Abba ‘Ori, from the city of Satnuf, to take their bodies, and to prepare them for
burial with costly cloths and pure unguents, and to lay them in a pure place; and he hid
them until the end of the persecution, and until a church could be built for them. Then they
laid their bodies in it, and great signs and wonders took place through them; now the
number of those who were martyred with them was four hundred and seven souls.
Salutation to Abba ‘Esi and to Thecla, and to the company of people who suffered with
them.
199

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died Saint John of Damascus. This holy man was the son of Mansur,
and he belonged to a great and honorable family in Damascus, and he was reared in the
knowledge and fear of God. He studied and learned philosophy under his teacher Kuezma,
a monk and a philosopher of Karili. When he had finished his studies Kuezma and
Mansur, the father of John, agreed together, and he went to the monastery of Saint Mar
Saba the martyr. When his father died he became scribe to the governor of the city, and he
did not conceal from him his secret. In those days rose up Constantine, the son of Leo, the
heretic and maker of war against pictures of the Godhead, and he troubled the churches.
And this Saint John, although he held no office in the Church, sent letters to all the
believers to strengthen them in the True Faith, and [he urged them] to bow down before
holy pictures, and brought testimony from the Divine Books. And when the heretic
emperor heard this he gnashed his teeth upon him, and he had a scribe brought, and he
made him write a letter, copying the handwriting of John, and sent it to the governor of
Damascus. And he made accusations against John, saying, “John who was with thee hath
sent me this letter [urging me] to go to war with thee. and to lay waste and plunder thy
city.” And having heard these words the governor believed [them], and he cut off the right
hand of Saint John wherewith he used to write. And taking his hand Saint John went to the
picture (or image) of our Lady, the holy Virgin Mary, and he entreated her with many
tears, saying, “O my Lady, hath not this thing happened unto me through contending for
the worship of thy picture? Heal thou me now by thy prayer and by thy knowledge.” And
after he had slept a little our holy Lady the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, appeared unto
him, and she made his hand to be as it had been formerly; and when he awoke he gave
thanks to our holy Lady the Virgin Mary. And he went to the monastery of Mar Saba, and
became a monk under the abbot, and the abbot handed him over to a spiritual elder to teach
him the rules of the monastic life. And the elder said unto him, “O my son, do nothing with
the learning which thou hast from outside, but learn to be silent”; and through the
abundance of his humility John overcame his Satanic pride. And one day one of the elder
monks died and he had a brother who asked John to write a funeral discourse and to weep
for his brother. And John said unto him, “I am afraid of the command of the elder my
teacher.” And the brother said unto him, “It will not be known to anyone.” And when the
brother had made many entreaties to John, he wrote a funeral discourse for him, which
made very sorrowful him that heard it. When his teacher heard of it he was wroth with
John, and he drove him out of his abode, and John took refuge with the other elders. And
when they had pressed the elder [to forgive John] he said unto them, “Can the latrine of the
monks be purged of his doctrine?” When John heard this he did as he commanded, and
that elder seeing the excellence of John received him with joy and brought him into his
house. The our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, commanded the elder to
forgive him. And John composed many Discourses, and these Discourses [are extant] to
this day. And the Archbishop of Jerusalem made John a priest against his will, and he
continued to fight for the retention of sacred pictures, and for the True Faith; and he reviled
kings and governors until [he reached] a green old age. And when the time for his removal
from this world arrived, he departed to Christ Whom he loved. Salutation to John of
Damascus.
And on this day also died Yeres Kela, and ‘Elkolonitos, and Eugenius the father of ‘Anba
Merina (Abba Marina).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
200

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TAHISAS 09
(December 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba Ba’Amin the faithful, who became a martyr although he did
not shed his blood. This holy man was from the monastery of the sons of Khadhib, to the
north of the province of ‘Eshmunayn, in the country of Egypt, and from the city of Tersa;
he was the steward of a certain rich man, and was beloved by everybody because of his
sincerity and justice. And the rich man had a wife who loved Abba Ba’Amin, and she
trusted him greatly. And Saint Abba Ba’Amin pondered about the end of the world, and
he left the service of that rich man, and he went to a monastery in that [place] and became
a monk therein. When the rich man heard that Saint Ba’Amin had left him, and departed,
he was exceedingly sorry. And taking his wife with him he went unto him, “We cannot
part from thee by any means, and we will not let thee go.” And the saint said unto them, “I
cannot [return], I have vowed myself to God”; and they departed from him sorrowing
greatly because of their parting from him. And this holy man fought a great and a good
fight, and he lived a life of strenuous devotion to God for many years with fasting, and
prayer, and vigil. And this was not enough for him, for he wished to become a martyr and
to pour out his blood for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he went to the city of
Antinoe where he found many Christians suffering torture, and he confessed our Lord
Jesus Christ, and they inflicted severe tortures upon him, and they scourged him, and they
burnt his body with fire, and they chopped off his limbs, and threw him on the wheel, and
they made iron rods red-hot and burnt his flesh with them. And under all these tortures our
Lord Christ strengthened him, and raised him up whole and uninjured. And whilst he was
suffering in this wise the worship of idols came to an end, for Constantine the Just became
emperor, and he commanded the keepers of the prisons to set free the Christians who had
been shut up in the prison houses by the infidel Diocletian for the sake of Christ’s Name.
And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto Saint Abba Ba’Amin and commanded him to go
unto all those saints who were in prison, and to make them to know that our lord Christ
reckoned among the martyrs those who were called “Confessors”; and the Emperor
Constantine commanded [his servants] to bring seventy-two of them. And there was there
with them Abba Nob, the confessor, and they went to him. And Saint Abba Ba’Amin
dwelt in a monastery which was outside the city of ‘Eshmunayn, and God give him a great
gift, and he healed the sick, and the report of him was noised abroad in all countries. Now
a very severe illness came upon the empress, the wife of the Emperor of Rome, and it
happened because of a certain God-fearing deacon who was near her, and who used to read
to her every day the Book of the Vision of John the Evangelist, that is to say,
“Abukalamsis (i.e. the Apocalypse).” And one of the emperor’s stewards was jealous of
him and he went to the emperor and said unto him, “Know, O my lord, that John the
deacon lieth with our lady the empress, thy wife, and maketh the pretence of reading to her
the Book of the Vision of John every day.” When the emperor heard this he was very
sorry, and he rose up straightway and went into his palace where the empress was, and he
found the deacon standing before the empress and reading the Book of the Vision of John.
And the emperor commanded [his soldiers] to take the deacon and his book and to sink
them both in the river; and two men saw the form of a shining man descending, and he
came and snatched the deacon out of the river together with his book, and he took him and
placed him on an island; and when the two men saw this they marveled exceedingly, and
201

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
they went to their houses and told no one connected with the emperor what they had seen.
When the empress saw what they had done to that deacon she was exceedingly sorry, and
her illness increased, and the disease attacked her belly; and she continued to suffer from
this disease for five and twenty years. And many physicians came to her but they were
unable to heal her of her sickness. And a certain learned man counseled her, saying, “If
thou wert to go to the holy men who are in the land of Egypt, then thou wouldst be healed
of thy sickness and tribulation.” And straightway she rose up, and there were many
soldiers with her, and she arrived in the land of Egypt, and she went about and visited
many monasteries and churches, but she was not healed of her sickness. When she came to
the city of Antinoe the nobles who saw her marveled exceedingly concerning her coming,
and she told them everything about her sickness, and they counseled her to go to Saint
Abba Ba’Amin; and she embarked in a ship for the monastery of Saint Abba Ba’Amin.
And one told the saint, saying, “Behold, the empress hath come to thee, and wishes to be
blessed by thee.” And he said unto him, “What have I to do with the empress of the earth
and her greatness?” And the brethren besought him earnestly to go out to her, and he did
so; and when the empress saw him she bowed low at his feet. And Saint Abba Bawmin
prayed concerning her sickness over some oil, and he anointed her therewith, and she was
healed of her sickness. And Saint Abba Ba’Amin said unto her, “Knew thou that this
sickness which hath come upon thee is caused by the deacon whom the emperor drowned
in the river, but he is alive at this day and dwells on this island in the river, and the Book of
the Vision of John Abukalamsis is with him”; and when the empress heard these words she
marveled exceedingly, and she praised God and rejoiced with very great joy because the
deacon was alive. And she offered to Saint Ba’Amin much money and many gifts, but he
took nothing from her except money [sufficient to buy] sacred vessels for the church, a
paten, a chalice, and a cross of gold; then she returned to the city of Rome praising God.
And when she met the emperor she told him all that had happened to her, and how Saint
Abba Ba’Amin had told her that the deacon whom he had drowned was alive at that time;
and when the emperor heard this he marveled exceedingly and sent messengers to the
island, and they found the deacon alive, and the Book of the Vision of John was with him;
and they returned and reported this to the emperor. And the emperor sent a messenger to
him a second time to entreat him to come to him; and they brought him to the emperor; and
when the emperor saw him he rejoiced with very great joy, and bowed down at his feet,
and he said unto him, “Forgive me my sin which I committed against thee.” And the saint
said unto him, “May God forgive both of us our sins.” And after this that deacon was
appointed Archbishop of the city of Rome, and he translated the Vision of John
Abukalamsis. And Saint Abba Ba’Amin fought by day and by night, ceaselessly, the
spiritual fight. And there was near him a certain holy bishop who made a festival of the
martyrs, with several believers, in a certain monastery; and the Arian heretics took to
themselves a false bishop and led astray very many of the people, and the bishop of the
city came to Saint Ba’Amin and told him of his sorrow [which was caused] by those
heretics. When the festival of the martyrs arrived Abba Ba’Amin prayed and entreated
God, and prostrated himself with his people that He would make the counsel of the heretics
void. Then he took a palm rod in his hand, and all the monks who were with him took
each his palm rod in his hand, and they went to the place where the heretics were, and
drove them away, and God, the Glorious and Most High, made void their counsel, and they
have not returned to this day. And Saint Ba’Amin, being an aged man, fell sick of a mortal
disease. And he gathered together the brethren and commanded them, and comforted
them, and told them that [the end of] his days was near, and that he was going to God, and
202

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the fathers and the brethren sorrowed because of his [approaching] separation from them,
and then he delivered up his soul to God his Creator. And the brethren swathed him for
burial in costly cloths and they sang psalms, and hymns, and dirges over him, as was meet.
And his body was a help unto all those who came to it, or to the church, in the True Faith,
and what they asked for came to them. Salutation to Abba Ba’Amin who lay on a red-hot
iron bed.
And this day also is the day of the deaths of Badlamo, and Yawaremya, and Zachariah the
monk.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 10
(December 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day they brought the body of Saint Abba Severus, Archbishop of the city of
Antioch, to Dabra Zegag, which is outside the city of Alexandria. This holy man having
died in the city of Seha in the house of a certain rich man whose name was Dorotheus, a
Christian and a lover of God, this man sent the body away in a ship under the charge of
certain believing and trustworthy men to Debra Zegag, which is outside the city of
Alexandria; and he commanded them not to travel by the chief stream of the river, and not
to land on the quayside. And when they came to the stream Kartas, facing the north,
having the body of the saint with them, they sailed a little towards the west, but they did
not find water enough to float their ship, and the crew labored very hard to force the ship
along. And they wished greatly to tow it, but were unable to do so, and they became sad
and sorry, and dismayed, and their courage failed them. And God, Who loves man, and
Who made the children of Israel to disappear before their enemies, and opened out a way
for them in the Red Sea and made them to pass over, this same God made the body of
Saint Severus to disappear from the heretic Melchites who had hated him during his
lifetime; now even after his death his words cut their hearts like a sword, and made
manifest His miracles. And He made the ship to sail slowly for a distance of seven stadia,
until they arrived at the place where they were to disembark. Then they took up the body
of the saint and brought it to Dabra Zegag and laid it in the shrine, which that rich man
Dorotheus had built for it. And there was great joy throughout all the land of Egypt, and
especially in the city of Alexandria, and God worked great signs and wonders through the
body of the saint. And one of the teeth of the saint fell out in his chamber during his
lifetime, and one of the monks of Dabra Zegag took it and wrapped it up in a silk rag, and
it healed everyone who was sick. And the monks used to take it to the city of Alexandria
and lay it on the sick, and they would walk. And God magnified Saint Abba Severus after
his death more than during his life. Salutation to Severus whose tooth, which fell out
during his life, heals those who are smitten with fever to this day.
On this day also died the holy father Abba Theophanius, the sixth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria, having sat on the throne of Mark the evangelist four years and six months; and
after this he died by murder. Salutation to Theophanius, and a petition for his prayers.
203

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Nicolaus, the Archbishop, whose name
being interpreted is “Conqueror of the people.” This just and holy man was one of the men
of the city of Mira, and his father’s name was Epiphanius, and the name of his mother was
Yona; these were rich, God-fearing folk of the city of Mira and they had no children. And
they continued thus in great sorrow because they had no son, and they prayed to God with
great frequency and made supplication to Him that He would give them a good son in
whom they might rejoice and who would inherit their riches. And they remained without a
son until they grew old and their time for begetting children had passed, and having failed
to have children they fell into despair, and knowing that they were barren, and that their
days had passed, and that they had become very old, they ceased to ask for a son. And
from the day when they did this God the Most High took pity upon them, and gave them
this holy man Nicolaus, and He made him holy, and blessed, and perfect, and He revealed
with him the beginning of the working of righteousness. When he was born he rose up and
stood among men for a space of two hours, and one knew by this concerning his being
raised up to work righteousness. When he sucked the breast of his mother, he only sucked
the right breast, and by this he showed that during all the days of his life he would only
drink of the fountain of the work of the right hand. And he completed the Canon of the
Apostles from his youth up, for on the day of the Eve of the Sabbath (Friday) and on the
Fourth Day of the week, he never sucked his mother’s breast except at the time of the ninth
hour of the day. When he was a little boy and his parents handed him over to the teacher
he sat and learned far more from the Holy Ghost than he did from his teacher. And in a
few days he learned all the doctrine and Law of the Holy Church, and was appointed
deacon, and he added to his spiritual labors. Then he became a monk in the monastery
wherein the son of this father was the brother of the abbot, and this saint fought a great
fight therein, and men who were born were unable to do as he did. And because he
performed many righteous deeds he was made a priest when the days [of his life] were
nineteen years. And God gave him great grace and the power to work signs and wonders
and to heal the sick. Who is able to declare his signs and wonders, the which he added to
everywhere daily throughout his life? And since he hath departed (i.e. died), it is meet for
us to mention a few of the things, which he did during his life. Now there was a very rich
man in his native city, and after many days his riches came to an end, and he became so
poor that he had not the wherewithal to get his daily food. And he had four daughters who
had grown old and had passed the period for marriage, and besides this no man would
marry them because of their poverty. And Satan caused the man to think a filthy thought,
namely, that he should make a house for whoremongers, and put his four daughters in it, so
that they might play the whore for hire and he and his daughters might get their food from
fornication. And God revealed unto Saint Nicolaus the thought, which this man was
thinking. And Saint Nicolaus rose up by night, and he took one hundred dinars in gold of
his father’s money, and tied it up in a cloth, and before the morning dawned he threw
[them] into the house of that man. When the man awoke from his sleep he found the gold,
and he rejoiced therein with a great joy, and he gave his eldest daughter away in marriage.
And the saint threw another hundred dinars of god into the man’s house, and he gave his
second daughter away in marriage. And on the third occasion when the saint threw gold
into his house the man woke up, and would not take the gold but went out of his house to
see who it was that threw the gold to him. And having gone out he found Saint Nicolaus
and he knew that it was he who had thrown the gold three times. And straightway that
man bowed down at his feet, and paid him great homage, and he said unto him, “Thy
reward will be great in the kingdom of the heavens, for thou hast saved me from want
204

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
caused by poverty, and from falling into sin; for I have thought that I shall be able to get
may third and fourth daughters married.” And then Saint Nicolaus drove out the Satans,
which were many, from the man, and from the trees wherein they dwell and lead men
astray. And this saint healed many sick people, and he pronounced a blessing over a little
bread, and satisfied very many people therewith. And they took what was left of that
bread, and they found that it was far more than it was originally. Before he was made a
bishop he saw a vision wherein he himself seemed to be seated on a great throne, having
with him the vestments of the honorable priesthood, and a shining man said unto him, “Put
on these vestments and sit upon this throne.” And on another night he saw our Lady Mary
giving unto him the vestments of the priesthood, and our Lord Jesus Christ gave him the
Gospel. When the Bishop of the city of Mira died, the angel of the Lord appeared unto the
Archbishop of the city of Rome, and spoke to him about Saint Nicolaus, and told him his
name, and described what manner of man his was. When the archbishop woke up he told
the bishops what he had seen, and they all believed that vision, and knew that it was from
the Lord Jesus Christ. And he took Saint Nicolaus and made him Bishop of the city of
Mira. After a few days Diocletian the infidel and idolater began to reign, and he arrested
many believing men. When he heard the report of this saint, he seized him and tortured
him severely for many years; and our Lord Christ strengthen him, and enable him to
endure, and He protected him against the torture, and raised him up sound and unharmed.
When Diocletian was tired of torturing him he cast him into the prison house, and God
gave him strength and protected him so that he might become a mighty branch of the tree
of the Faith. And he remained in prison until God destroyed Diocletian and made
Constantine the Just to reign. And Constantine brought out all the confessors from the
prison houses, and with them was Saint Nicolaus, and he returned to his country in peace.
And he continued to teach the True Faith to all the people, and he urged them to be strong,
until the assembling of the General Council of the Three Hundred and Eighteen Bishops in
the city of Nicea; and this father was one of them, and he rebuked Arius and cast him out.
And having finished his fight and guarded his flock Saint Nicolaus departed to God,
having sat on his Episcopal throne for more than forty years; and all the days of his life
were eighty years. Salutation to Saint Nicolaus.
And on this day Talases and ‘Al’Azar (Lazarus) became martyrs. This Talases was a man
of Babylon, of the province of Nineveh. And Sapor, the King of Persia, said unto him,
“Worship fire and sacrifice to idols.” And Talases said, “I worship the Lord my God, and
to Him I offer up sacrifice.” And Sapor commanded his soldiers to bring all the
instruments of torture in order to frighten Talases, and when he was not afraid of his terror
Sapor commanded them to beat him with one hundred strips, and for a long time, and he
said unto him, “Offer sacrifice, Taslas, so that thou mayest have rest from the torture”; and
Taslas said unto him, “I do not know (i.e. feel) thy torturing, for my God delivers me [from
it].” And Sapor commanded them to beat him with another hundred stripes, and they fixed
bandages over his eyes and they beat him with seventy stripes--until he made no answer,
and then they cut off his head with the sword. Then they brought out ‘Al’Azar (Lazarus),
and Sapor, King of Persia, said unto him, “Sacrifice to the gods”; and when he refused to
worship and to offer sacrifice to the gods, they cast him into the fire forthwith. Thus they
finished their martyrdom nobly. Salutation to Taslas (sic) and to ‘Al’Azar (Lazarus).
And on this day also died Saint Surset. This holy woman was daughter of one of the
nobles of Constantinia, and they betrothed her to the son of a nobleman. When she heard
this she said unto her father, “Permit me first to go and worship in the sanctuary, the place
205

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
of my conversion; God’s Will be done!” And her father said unto her, “Go first to thy
bridal bed, and when thy marriage is consummated go with him (i.e. thy husband) and
fulfill thy vows.” And she said unto him, “I made a covenant with God that I would pray
in that holy place as long as I was a virgin, and if I falsify my words a punishment from
God will come upon me.” When her father heard this he sent her away with guards, and
handmaidens to minister to her, and he gave her the sum of three hundred dinars in gold to
give away in alms. When she arrived there she went round to all the holy places, and when
she came to the monastery of the Egyptians she found an elder monk dressed in sackcloth,
and she told him everything, which was in her heart; and he said unto her, “God’s Will be
done!” And when her attendants were ready to go, she went into a secret place and wrote a
letter to her father, saying, “I have offered myself to God. Seek me not for thou wilt not
find me.” And she tied up the letter with her clothes, and placed it with her baggage, and
she made her attendants think that she was going with them. And whilst they were going
on in front bearing her baggage, she said to a slave, “I wish to pray in the shrine of
Golgotha before our departure.” And he said unto her, “[The others] have gone on before
us, how canst thou travel alone?” And she said unto him, “What hath it to do with thee? I
will go by myself and come back.” Then she took her handmaid and went into the shrine
of Golgotha, and she said unto her slave, “Wait here for me a little”; and then she went
away by herself. And she came to that elder monk, and when he saw her he rejoiced, and
she cast herself down at his feet, and she gave him the three hundred dinars for the poor,
and she asked him to make her a nun. Then he rose up and prayed, and he arrayed her in
the garb of the nun, that is to say sackcloth, and he prayed over her, and he helped her to
follow the way of God. And she entered [her] cell when she was eighteen years of age,
and she dwelt therein for seven and twenty years, without seeing the face of a man. Now it
happened that there was a certain monk, whose name was Silas, who was a fighter, from
the country of Caesarea, who had a friend who was a pilgrim and a man of the desert, and
he lived in the caves of Kalmon. And at each festival Silas used to visit him, taking a little
food [with him], and he was blessed by him. And when Easter came Silas took a few
loaves of bread, and went to seek his friend according to his custom, and he could not find
him. And when he was tired of searching for him, and was wandering about over the
mountains and hills, he found the footprint of a man, and he followed the footprints and
found a small cave, and he said, “Bless me, O saint!” And there was none who answered.
And he went inside the cave and found a monk fasting, and each bowed to the other and
asked for his prayer. And the monk of the cave said unto him, “It is meet that thou
shouldst pray for me, for thou art a priest.” When Silas heard this he was astonished [and
he wondered] how the man knew his secret. And he meditated in his heart, saying, “Is it a
woman or a eunuch?” Then she revealed unto him all her story, and he brought her food,
but she would not eat, and she died, and he buried her in her cell. Salutation to the lady
Surset.
And on this day also died Abba Tewashi. This holy man was a eunuch from his youth, and
he became a monk in a certain monastery and he fought the spiritual fight therein for many
days. One day as he was going to Alexandria he found a woman weeping, and when he
asked her [why she was weeping] she said unto him, “I am a Jewess and I wish to become
a Christian.” And he took her with him, wishing to do good to himself, and not to receive
punishment from God, and he baptized her with Christian baptism. And he began to go
about with her in the bazaars and received alms, and the men of Alexandria were
scandalized, for they thought that she was his wife. And they seized him and brought him
before Abba John, the merciful, and they said unto him, “Behold here is a man who is
206

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
disgracing the monks. Order [thy servants] to beat them and to separate them, and let the
monk be put in fetters.” And Abba John dreamed a dream, and he saw in his dream that
monk who was showing him his lacerated back, and the monk said unto him, “Why dost
thou lacerate my back without any offence on my part?” When Abba John awoke he
commanded them to bring the monk to him, [and they did so], and he commanded them to
strip off his tunic so that they might see his back, and by the Will of God his raiment
dropped down and he found that he was a eunuch. And Abba John wept and removed
from their offices those men who had brought him and beaten him, and he prohibited them
the Eucharist for three years. And he wished to give the eunuch one hundred dinars, but he
would not accept them from him; and Abba Tewashi departed to his monastery and died
fighting strenuously as it were to-day.
And on this day also are commemorated the deaths of Milases and Tawfya.
Salutation to Paul who lived in the desert and despised earthly riches. [This and the
preceding paragraph are wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 11
(December 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Bakimos. This holy man was a man of the city of
Fas, in the province of Masil, in the north of Egypt; and when his days were twelve years
he guarded and shepherded his father’s sheep. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto
him in the form of a young man, and said unto him, “Wilt thou come and go with me, and
become a monk?” And he said, “Yea”; and the two agreed together, and they rose up and
went to the desert of Scete. And they found three elder monks [there], and Abba Bakimos
dwelt with them for four and twenty years, when the elder monks died. And after this
Abba Bakimos went a long journey into the desert, a distance of three days. And Satan
appeared unto him in the forms of wild beasts, and pigs, and serpents, and they opened
their mouths to seize him, and they surrounded him, and he knew by the Holy Spirit their
intent; and he blew out breaths at them in the might of God, and they were scattered. Then
again he found a valley and he lived in it for three years fasting a week at a time, and at the
end of the week he would fill his hand with dates from that valley and eat them, and drink
a little water. And he prayed two thousand four hundred prayers during the night and two
thousand during the day; and his prayer was “Our Father, Who art in heaven.” And for a
period of four and twenty years he fasted forty days at a time, and at the end of the forty
days he would eat. On one occasion he fasted eighty days, and at length his skin became
stretched tightly over his bones; and straightway the angel of the Lord brought him bread
to eat, and water to drink. And he lived for many years, and that bread and that water did
not come to an end until he died. And the angel of the Lord God appeared in a vision of the
night to Saint Abba Bakimos, and commanded him to return to his city. And he rose up
and departed and came to the outskirts of his city, and he built himself a small cell there,
and he dwelt therein alone; and he was a refuge and a harbor unto everyone who came to
207

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him, and the good hope of all men. And they dwelt there and were comforted by him and
his doctrine, and they emulated his service, and his righteousness, and his spiritual
fightings. And one day the angel of the Lord lifted him up and brought him to the land of
the Euphrates (?), for the people had transgressed and had gone out of the way of
righteousness, and he converted them all to the True Faith, and returned to his cell. And
one day as he was going through the city carrying some baskets to sell in order to obtain
food, the weariness of the road overcame him, and he set down the baskets and sat down
himself to rest a little; and the power of the Lord lifted up him and his baskets and carried
them where he wished to be. And at that time Abba Sinoda saw an exceedingly high pillar
made of pearl-stone, and he was astonished, and said, “What is this great pillar?” And the
angle of the Lord appeared unto Abba Sinoda and said unto him, “This is Abba Bakimos.”
And straightway Abba Sinoda rose up, and walked on his feet until he came to the city of
Abba Bakimos--now up to that time he had never seen him--and when the two men met
they embraced each other. And Abba Bakimos wished to cook a little [food] for the
morning, and he said to Abba Sinoda, “Take this pot and go, and draw water, and fill it,
and bring it to me.” And straightway Abba Sinoda rose up, and lifted the pot upon his
shoulder, and he drew water, and filled it, and brought it to him, and he found the food
boiling and cooked. Then he knew that the man was Abba Bakimos, and he saluted him a
second time, and embraced him, and then he told Abba Bakimos that he had seen a vision
concerning him; and he abode with him for a few days. One day when the two of them
were walking together, they found the head of a dead man, and Abba Sinoda tapped it with
his staff, saying, “Rise up, O dead man, that thou mayest tell me and make me to know
what thou hast seen.” And God commanded the soul of the dead man, and the soul
returned to the skull, and became a body, and the man rose up from the dead. And the
dead man did homage to them and told them everything about Sheol, and about those who
are punished therein, each in their degree, and he told them about himself and that he was a
pagan. And he said unto them, “Below with us there are some men who were Christians
and who believed in the Name of Christ, but who did not perform His commandments, and
who walked in the ways of the Gentiles, and who dwelt in the uncleanness of the pagans.”
And the saint said unto him, “Lie down now and sleep”; and the dead man turned and lay
down as he was at first. Then Abba Sinoda embraced the blessed Abba Bakimos, and they
returned to his mountain. And when the time of the departure of Saint Abba Bakimos
drew nigh, and he was about to leave this world, he called his ministrant who was with
him, and informed him about the time of his death; and he commanded him to bury his
body in the place wherein he then was. And he became a little sick with the sickness of
fever, and he saw the companies of the saints coming to him, and straightway he delivered
up his soul into the hand of God; and the angels took it, and they sang as they went before
it until they brought it to the Jerusalem, which is in the heavens. And all the days of the
life of Abba Bakimos were seventy years; twelve years he lived in the world, and eight and
fifty years he passed in the strenuous spiritual fight of the ascetic life. Salutation to
Bakimos.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Bartholomew the bishop, and Batlan the martyr.
Salutation to our father Bartholomew.
Salutation to thy birth, O Theodore of the joyful face, who was like a good fruit springing from a
good tree. [This paragraph is wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

208

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TAHISAS 12
(December 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the glorious angel, Michael the Archangel. On this
day God sent him to the city of Babylon, and he was the fourth person with the Three
Children, Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, in the fiery furnace, when Nebuchadnezzar, the
King of Babylon, threw them into it. And the flames rose up to a height of nine and forty
cubits and consumed those who attended to the fire. And Michael beat out the fire with his
staff, and extinguished it round about the Three Children and delivered them, and [the fire]
did not touch them. And he made the inside of the furnace to be as cool as the dew at the
dawn of day, and in it they praised God, saying, “Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers!
Praised and exalted is He for ever.” And Michael prophesied seven times that after seven
hundred years Christ should be born; and after this the Three Children praised God, saying,
“Let every servant of God praise God.” And he prophesied seven and thirty times that
Christ should live upon the earth three and thirty years, and for this reason our Fathers the
Apostles ordained that people should celebrate the festival of Michael the Archangel.
Salutation to Michael.
And on this day also died Abba Samuel of Waldebba. Then name of the father of this holy
man was Stephen, and the name of his mother was ‘Ammata Maryam; they were people of
good family and they took this holy man to the country of ‘Aksum, and when he grew up
they taught him the Books of the Church. Then when his father and mother died he went
to Dabra Bankol, to Abba Madhanina Egzi’e, and he put on the garb of the monastic life,
and he dwelt there and fought the fight with fasting and with prayer. He ate nothing except
withered and decayed herbs, and his drink was water, and he became the servant of the
monks, in the grinding of corn, and the drawing of water. And as he found it irksome
when his kinfolk came to visit him, he departed to another place. And he devoted himself
to fasting, and to standing up, and to prostrating himself so strenuously that at length he
crushed his feet (i.e. became flat-footed). Thence he departed to the desert, and he ate no
food whatsoever for forty days and forty nights. And the lions, and the leopards, and all
kinds of terrifying wild beasts came to him, and bowed down before him, and licked the
dust at his feet. One day as he was going along the road he arrived at a valley (or river),
which was full of water. Now he had with him a book and some fire, and making a prayer
he entered the water, and although it engulfed him and the current dragged him down, yet
by the power of God having forced himself across to the opposite bank, he found that the
fire was not extinguished, and the book uninjured. And Satan used to try him with
phantoms of every kind of wild beast, but he was not frightened because his mind was
bound up with confidence in his God. And as Abba Samuel was praying our Lord Jesus
Christ came to him, and sealed his whole body and each limb thereof with His spittle, and
he became filled with power. And from that day he bound his feet with fetters, and wore
sackcloth. And he thrust all his limbs into water, and he recited the Psalms of David five
times [each day], and he scourged his back with strips innumerable. And the lions used to
peer into his cave like sheep, and of some he used to stroke their bodies, and of others he
used to dress their wounds, and pluck out the thorns from [their paws]. And then many
disciples attached themselves to him, and of these the first was Abba Zarufael. One day
Abba Samuel met Abba Gabra Maskal, of Dabra Laggaso, (now they had never seen each
209

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
other before,) and they passed the day in describing the great works of God. And at the
time for supper, when they were making their prayers, a table came down to them from
heaven, and they ate and gave thanks to God. Then one day he met a certain monk from
the desert, and when they began to talk about the Mysteries which God had made for them,
Abuna Samuel said, “Behold, for twelve years I have been standing in the heights and
censing the throne of God with the Four and Twenty Priests of Heaven.” And when he
went in and was consecrating the Offering, there came down to him bread and a chalice
from heaven; and when he was reading the Praises of our Lady Maryam, he was lifted up
off the ground to the height of a cubit, and our Holy Lady, the Virgin Maryam, came and
gave him a precious stone which shot out light from it, and some pure incense. And when
the time of his departure drew nigh Michael the Archangel came unto him, and he caught
him up on his wings and showed him all the delights of the heavenly Jerusalem. And he
brought him before the throne of God, and Abba Samuel received from him the promise
concerning the man who should invoke his name or celebrate his commemoration. And
when he returned to his bed he told his disciples everything, which he had seen, and then
he died in peace. Salutation to Abba Samuel.
Salutation to the gathering together in one place of the Sixty Bishops who were against
Benates (or Betnas).
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Khadre (Hydra) of Dabra ‘Aswan, and Saint
John the Confessor. Salutation to Khadre.
And on this day also took place the assembling of the General Council of the Holy
Bishops, and priests, and deacons in the city of Rome in the first year of the reign of
Decius, the infidel, when Cornelius held the office of Archbishop of the city of Rome, and
Dionysius was Archbishop of Alexandria, and Bandeyos (Flavianus) was Archbishop of
Antioch, and Germanus was Archbishop of Jerusalem. And this Council was assembled
because of Benates (or Betnas, Novatus), a priest of Sehet (Scete) who said, “He Who
denies Christ in the time of persecution shall not be accepted when he repents; and he who
hath fallen into fornication shall not be accepted when he repents.” And Cornelius rebuked
him for this, once, and a second time, and a third time, but he would not accept the rebuke.
And there gathered together against him sixty bishops, and eighteen learned priests, and
scribes, and forty learned deacons of the city of Rome, and they disputed with Benates
(Novatus?) concerning this matter. And the pretext which he put forward for his views
were the words of Paul the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews (vi, 4-6), “If they have
received the light, and have tasted heavenly grace, and have received the grace of the Holy
Spirit, and if they have fallen into sin they cannot be renewed by repentance a second
time.” And the Fathers replied to him, and explained the matter to him, saying, “Paul the
Apostle doth not say this concerning the man who repented, but concerning the man who is
baptized with Christian baptism each time he falls into sin. And concerning such a man
the apostle goes on to say, ‘Shall their head, the Son of God, be crucified a second time,
and put to shame by them?’ The apostle makes known that the Cross could only be
[found] once, but that repentance can be found at all times. And if a men hath fallen
through denying Christ, or through sin, is he not to be accepted through repentance? --As
thou sayest, was not the repentance of David accepted? And was not the repentance of
Peter, who denied our Lord Jesus Christ, accepted? And did not God give him the grace of
the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete? And did He not set him over His rational flock? And shall
everyone who hath been baptized by his hand be not baptized again, but, according to what
210

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
thou sayest, perish? This is great folly. Our Lord Jesus Christ hath placed repentance so
that it may be found by everyone who hath denied the Faith, or who hath fallen into sin.
Depart from this unclean opinion, O Benates (Novatus?), and repent of it, and be not the
enemy of God and of thyself, and the enemy of all mankind.” But he would not turn from
his evil opinion, and he would not accept the words of the whole Council of holy Bishops;
and the bishops anathematized and excommunicated all those who believed in his words.
Salutation to Anicetus and his company who finished their martyrdom by fire.
And on this day also Saint Anicetus became a martyr in the days of Diocletian, the infidel
emperor. When this martyr Anicetus saw the tortures, which the emperor inflicted on the
believers in order to terrify them, he rose up from among them with a bold heart, and
reviled the emperor. When the emperor heard him, he commanded his soldiers to bind him
with fetters, and to keep him under guard in the theatre, and to let loose a fierce lion upon
him; and when the lion came up to him he stretched out his right hand, and the lion licked
the face and cheeks of Saint Anicetus. When Diocletian saw this he commanded them to
cut off his head with the sword, but when the executioner had drawn his sword, he
trembled and was unable to wield it. And they threw Anicetus on to the wheel under
which was spread out a layer of red-hot coals, and they placed him under the wheel so that
his soul might be broken quickly; but God delivered him from these tortures uninjured.
And then they threw him into a cauldron in which lead was boiling, and whilst the people
were looking on, the angel of the Lord came and plucked him out of the cauldron, and set
him before Diocletian. And when Photinus saw this miracle, he rose up naked and
embraced his brother Anicetus, and he cursed the tyrant, saying, “O disgraceful one, how
wilt thou conquer my brother?” When Diocletian heard this he commanded his soldiers to
put collars of iron on their necks, and fetters on their feet and to carry them off to the
prison house. Then he commanded them to bring them out and to scrape their bodies with
iron combs until their flesh was torn into strips. And he also commanded them to take
them into the theatre and stone them with stones, but the saints remained uninjured, and
they also beat their sides and backs with whips, and threw salt on their wounds; and they
also cast them into the furnace of the baths which had been heated for three days, but it
was to them like unto cool dew, and when they opened the bath chamber they found them
in converse concerning the great things of God. When the tyrant saw this he was
exceedingly wroth, and he commanded them to heat a furnace until the flames came out of
the top of it, and therein they cast the righteous martyrs. And standing up in the furnace
they prayed for a long time, and they made the sign of the Cross over their faces in the
Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, One God, and they delivered up their
souls into the hand of God. And their bodies lay upon the burning coals from the second
until the seventh (or sixth) hour of the day, but they were unharmed, and the hair of their
heads was not singed. When it was night certain believing men took the bodies and
swathed them for burial in a manner befitting their honorable rank, and they buried them in
a beautiful tomb, and signs and wonders appeared through them. Salutation to Anicetus
and Photinus.
And on this day also are commemorated ‘Eusis (Ausis) the martyr, and Abba Antonius,
and John the Confessor and teacher from Rome.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
211

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TAHISAS 13
(December 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Basofreyos (Parsnuphis) became a martyr in the days of the Muslims.
This blessed man became a monk in the church of Gabriel the Archangel, in the city of
Mesr (Cairo), on the banks of the river [Nile], and he fought a great fight therein, and he
disputed with the Muslim Shekhs concerning the True Faith, and he made manifest to them
the Godhead of our Lord Christ. And because of this the Muslims were wroth with him,
and they tortured him severely, and cut off his head with the sword, and he received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Befsufyos.
And on this day also died Saint Abracius. This saint was a man of Upper Egypt, and he
put on the garb of the monastic life when he was twenty years of age, and he fought a great
and a good fight. And when Satan grew tired of setting himself in opposition to him
[secretly], and of being overcome when he fought him, being unable to effect anything
against him, he came to him openly, face to face, and said unto him, “There are left unto
thee of thy days fifty more years,” wishing by these words to cast the saint into despair.
And the holy elder answered and said unto him, “Thou hast made me sorrowful; I was
thinking that I had another hundred years to live, and therefore I was weary. But if it be
truly as thou sayest, it behooves me to fight before I die.” And then he fought strenuously
and increased the strictness of his ascetic life, but he died that same year and departed to
God; and he ended, the seventieth year of his life still fighting. Salutation to Abracius.
And on this day also Saint Hannah conceived our holy Lady the Virgin Maryam, the Godbearer. Salutation O blessed Hannah to thy conception!
And on this day also died the holy father Michael, the desert monk, of Dabra Kalmon.
Salutation to Michael, the desert monk and priest.
And on this day also is commemorated Abba Makari (Macarius), who fed upon partridges.
This father Makari (Macarius) sought from his youth to follow the Living God, and he
learned the Books of the Church, and he knew that this fleeting world would come to an
end, and that there was a reward for the just and a punishment for sinners. Therefore he
forsook the world and became a monk in a monastery. Thence he went forth into the
desert, a journey of ten days, and he came to a monastery about which there was nothing
except roots and partridges; and water in abundance was there. And straightway he
pondered and said, “If I go out into the fields after the partridges my labor and my prayers
would be in vain, for I have, since I am alone by myself, no one to come to my help. And
as for him who saith, ‘Thou shalt not eat flesh,’ is it not the flesh of thy neighbor [to which
he refers] in derision? And God knows that I have nothing else to eat except these
[partridges and roots].” And from that day he began to net the partridges, and each day he
netted one and cooked it with herbs, and thus fed himself with what God had given him,
and he drank of the water there and gave thanks; and he prayed, and made supplication to
God, and kept vigil all the night. And he continued to do this for many years, and he never
heard the voice of a man, and he never saw the face of a man, and he never spoke to a man,
and he neither reviled nor abused anyone; and he used to say, “Satan only makes his
appearance with man.” And after this a certain monk from Constantinople came to the
212

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
place where Saint Makari (Macarius) was living, seeking [in] the desert [for him]. And
when he was Abba Makari (Macarius) netting the birds he could not contain himself, but
he made haste to slay his brother with calumny. And the [monk from] Constantinople
came to the archbishop, and he went in to tell him everything which he had seen, [saying],
“I went into the desert to look for the caves [of the monks], and there I saw a monk living
by himself and netting birds so that he might eat flesh, and so disgrace us when the people
saw what he was doing.” When the archbishop heard these words he sent away that monk
with a messenger so that he might know all that had happened, and find out if what the
monk who had gone to him had told him was true. And before the two men had arrived,
and whilst they were still on the road, Abba Makari (Macarius) went to net partridges
according to his wont, and he netted three birds in one net. And he thought, saying, “Hath
God given me these [three] birds to try me? Hath not my belly been satisfied (or filled) up
to this day? [They must be] for others, but I have never seen any man in this desert.”
Whilst he was thus thinking the two monks who had been sent by the archbishop arrived,
and when he saw them, he rejoiced, saying, “I thank Thee, O God Who hast given me food
for Thy servants, Thou knowing well my poverty.” And they nodded to him as he brought
the table towards them, and he said unto them, “Take, O my brethren, and sit down.” And
he seized his vessel and ate silently and without a word until he had finished, according to
his wont, and he finished without a word. And the two monks refused to eat, and they said
unto him, “We do not eat flesh for we are monks, and there is laid upon us the prohibition
to eat flesh.” And Abba Makari (Macarius) left them and did not force them, and he took
the birds which he had cooked and blew upon them three times, and they flew up into the
air and went back to their nests as if they had never been netted. When the two monks saw
this miracle they bowed down before him and said unto him, “Forgive us, O holy one of
God; we have sinned and gone astray concerning thee.” And he said unto them, “It is God
Who shall forgive you your sins, for I am sinner”; and when they saw this they marveled
and went back to their country and related all the miracles of the saint, which they had
seen. And the archbishop heard this, and, wondering, he went to the emperor and said unto
him, “Behold, a righteous monk hath been found in our days, come, let us go to him so that
we may receive his blessing.” And the emperor rose up with his soldiers, and with him
were the archbishop, and bishops, and priests, and deacons, and when he came nigh unto
him, an angel took the saint and lifted him up to carry him to the Country of the Living;
and when the emperor saw him going up he said unto him, “Bless us, O saint of God, and
speak one word unto us.” And the saint said unto them, ”Let your tongues fast from the
words of calumny. If a priest doth not learn from books, overmuch pride and boasting will
not come upon him; and if a monk doth not learn too much, arrogance will not come to
him. Love ye one another, and God be with you all.” And thus saying he ascended before
them. Salutation to Makari (Macarius).
And on this day also are commemorated Abranicus the martyr, and Horasafon, and
Cornelius the governor, and Warktepos (or Wartepala), and ‘Arfra (or Fefra).
Salutation to Rufa’el, the healer-angel. [This salutation is wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

213

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TAHISAS 14
(December 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Simon, who was from the city of Upper Manuf, in the north of Egypt,
became a martyr in the days of the Muslims. This holy man used to dispute with a certain
Muslim Shekh, and he overcame him in argument. And that Shekh went and laid
information against him before the Chief Shekh, and he said unto him, “This man hath
cursed the Muslim Faith.” And the Muslims seized Simon and tortured him severely, and
then they cut off his head with the sword and he received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Simon.
And on this day also Saint Abba Behur and Abba Minas, the elder, became martyrs.
And on this day also Saint Marhamnam, and his sister Sara, and his twelve slaves became
martyrs. The father of this saint was the King of Athor (Assyria), and he worshipped
graven images, the names of which were Bel and Babel (sic); and his mother was a
Christian. And this Saint Marhamnam asked his father for permission to go out into the
desert and hunt wild beasts, and his father having given him permission he [made ready to]
set out with his forty slaves, and mounted on horses, and he came to his mother [before he
departed] and said unto her, “I am going to hunt wild beasts”; and his mother said, “May
the Lord God of heaven and earth bless thee.” And as he journeyed along he came to
Mount Maklub, and he sojourned there. And during the night the angel of the Lord called
to him and said unto him, “Marhamnam, Marhamnam, rise up and ascend this mountain,
and thou shalt see a man whose name is Matthew, and he hall speak unto thee the word of
life.” And on the following day, when he had gone up into the mountain, he found Abba
Matthew who was dressed in a hairy skin like a sheep; and when Marhamnam saw him he
was afraid. And Saint Matthew said unto him, “Draw nigh unto me, O my son, for I am a
man like thyself and the property of God.” And Marhamnam said unto him, “My father, is
there any other god besides the gods?” And Abba Matthew taught him the whole of the
Faith of God, down to the Birth of Christ, and His Death, and His Resurrection, and the
reward of the righteous and recompense of sinners. And Marhamnam said unto him, “O
my father, my sister is a leper from the crown of her head to the sole of her foot, and if
thou canst heal her in the Name of thy God I will believe in Him.” And Abba Matthew
said unto him, “Come, get thee down and I will heal her.” And Saint Marhamnam in going
down from the mountain left Abba Matthew on the road, and when he came to his mother
he told her everything; then he took his sister and carried her to Abba Matthew. And when
the saint saw them [coming] he made a long prayer to God, and smote the earth and made a
mark in the form of the Cross-upon it whereupon a spring of water bubbled up, abundant
as a river. And he made the brother and sister to go down into the water, and he laid his
hand on their heads, and baptized them in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost, and their forty men who were with him; and he administered to them the Holy
Mysteries, and straightway his sister was healed of her leprosy. And he admonished them
and strengthened them in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and showed them how that He
had accepted for their sakes all the pain and the buffeting which should have come to them,
and found them, and dismissed them in peace. And when Saint Marhamnam arrived home
he went to his mother, but he neither went to his father, nor to the house of the gods.
When the king heard this he was wroth, and he commanded [his soldiers] to beat him, and
214

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Saint Marhamnam departed with his sister, and his soldiers, and went up into the mountain,
the name of which is “Kasr” and sat down there. When his father heard this he sent his
chamberlain to them with glorious apparel, and the royal crowns, and [commanded them]
to say unto his son, “Take my kingdom.” When Saint Marhamnam saw them he was
furious with them, and he said unto them, “I am seeking the kingdom of my Lord Jesus
Christ which neither grows old nor perishes.” When his father heard this he was very
wroth, and he commanded his soldiers to slay his son’s slaves first of all so that he might
frighten his son, and make him come back to him; and if he was not afraid, and did not
come back, they were to kill him and his sister. When Saint Marhamnam heard this he
prayed and entreated God to give him all his desire; and a voice came, saying, “I have
heard thy prayer and I have given thee thy heart’s desire.” And straightway the officer cut
off the heads of the saints with the sword, and cast them into a pit. And they brought much
wood so that they might burn the bodies of the saints with fire, but they could not find
them because God had hidden them. And when the soldiers saw that the sun became dark,
and the earth quaked, they were afraid and fled. And Satan entered into the heart of
Sanakrem, the King of Athor (Assyria), and he cried out like the swine. When the mother
of Saint Marhamnam heard that her husband was mad, she sent for Abba Matthew, and
made him come, and she told him about the king. And when Abba Matthew had prayed
over some oil and anointed him therewith, Satan went out of him in the form of a pig. And
the king believed in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Abba Matthew baptized him,
and his wife, and all the men of his royal city. And he commanded his people to build a
church in the name of our holy Lady, the Virgin Maryam, the God-bearer, and to distribute
money in alms among the poor and needy, and they did as he commanded. Then the
mother of Saint Marhamnam made forty coffins of costly stone, and she collected the
bones of those forty soldier-martyrs, and put each [group of bones to its coffin]. And she
also made two coffins of crystal for her children, and she put [their bodies] in them, and
laid the coffins in the church, which she had built. And through their bodies innumerable
signs and miracles took place. Salutation to Marhamnam who traversed the desert in
search of the Faith of Christ. Salutation to the Forty Soldiers who suffered with
Marhamnam, and to Sara his sister. Salutation to the Seventeen Thousand men of
Marhamnam who fought the fight.
And on this day also are commemorated the one hundred and ninety thousand martyrs who
were soldiers of the King of Athor (Assyria), the father of Saint Marhamnam. And after
Senakrem, the King of Athor (Assyria), whom Abba Matthew baptized, there reigned
another king who knew not God. And whilst he was in the country of the Chaldeans he
heard that the King of Athor (Assyria) was dead, and that his son reigned in his stead, and
that his son was not able to rule the kingdom, and that he had stewards (or administrators),
who had lived in his father’s days, and that they ruled his kingdom, and that his mother
ruled instead of him, and that the stewards held her in subjection. Therefore he gathered
together his soldiers and departed to rule over the country of Athor (Assyria). And when
the men of the kingdom [of Athor (Assyria)] heard that there had come to reign over them
a king who worshipped idols, they gathered together their soldiers and went out to fight
[them]. And the servants of the house of Senakrem, and the servants of Marhamnam who
guarded his grave, went out by themselves to fight, and when they fought the King of the
Chaldeans conquered them and they fled before him. And the Chaldeans captured the city,
and seized the young king and killed him, and his mother also. Than all the men of the
kingdom submitted to him, and he reigned over them. And after a few days he gathered
together all the men of the country of Athor (Assyria), and he questioned them concerning
215

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
their Faith, and they said unto him, “We are Christians.” And he commanded them to
worship idols, and all the people abandoned their Faith and worshipped idols. And the
servants of Saint Marhamnam and the servants of his father came, and they said boldly,
“We are Christians, and the servants of Christians, and guardians of the tomb of Saint
Marhamnam, a work which hath been committed to us, and we will not deny the Faith
which our Lord taught us.” And the king was wroth, and he commanded his soldiers to
slay them all with the sword, and they slew them, and they were in number one hundred
and seventy thousand, and were called the “Companions of Marhamnam”.
And on this day also died Abba Gabra Krestos, the sixty-sixth Archbishop of Alexandria.
In his days very many signs and wonders [took place]. And behold, he heard concerning a
certain church which was built in the name of our holy Lady the Virgin Maryam, in the
country of ‘Andal, and that there was a withered olive tree beyond the doors thereof. And it
was said that on the day of the festival of our holy Lady the Virgin Maryam, this tree used
to put forth leaves, and bear fruit, and that when the festival was ended the tree returned to
its former withered state. And because of this Abba Gabra Krestos the archbishop lifted up
his eyes to God, and prayed to Him to explain this miracle to him. And that night the angel
of the Lord caught him up and brought him to that church, and he saw that withered tree,
and after it had put forth leaves and borne fruit it returned to its former state forthwith; and
he told the people what had taken place and they doubted it. And after a few days came
the governor of Andalusia, a man whose name was John, and the holy father, the
archbishop Abba Krestos, asked him before all the priest and people, saying, “Is it true
according to what I have heard, that there is a withered olive tree by the doors of the
church of our holy Lady, the Virgin Maryam, this tree puts forth leaves and bears fruit?”
And the governor listened and said unto him, “It is true, my father, for I have been there on
the day of the festival of our holy Lady the Virgin Maryam, and I have seen its withered
state with mine own eyes. And as soon as the sun rose on the day of the festival of our
Lady Mary that tree burst into leaf, and blossomed, and bore fruit, and the olives which it
produced up to midday were so many that they could not be counted. And straightway the
steward of the church went out and took of the fruit, and made olive oil there from, and
filled the lamps of the church therewith. And the people prayed and finished the office of
the Eucharist, and partook of the Holy Mysteries and departed to their districts. And after
this the steward of the church and the priests went out and gathered all the fruit on the tree,
and afterwards the people took some of the fruit as a ‘blessing’. And the steward and the
priests made the olives into oil, and there was sufficient to supply the lamps of the church
and for their own consumption until the end of the year. And that same day the tree
withered and its leaves dropped off.” And when the people heard this they marveled at the
miracle exceedingly, and they glorified God and gave thanks to our holy Lady the Virgin
Maryam. And in the days of this father a certain man whose name was Cyril went to the
country of Ethiopia, and made pretence to be a bishop. And he sent much money to the
King of Egypt, saying, “Command thou the Archbishop, Abba Gabra Krestos, to send a
messenger to appoint me bishop whilst I am in my country Ethiopia, and each year I will
send thee much gold as a present.” And the King of Egypt summoned Abba Gabra Krestos
to him, and he said unto him, “Send a man on thy behalf to the country of Ethiopia to
appoint Cyril bishop.” And the archbishop answered and said unto him, “This is
undesirable, unless he cometh here.” And the king said unto him, “Do as I have
commanded thee,” and the archbishop said unto him, “Thy will shall be done.” And the
archbishop went forth from the king sorrowfully, and he grieved exceedingly about the
matter, and he gathered together all the bishops and told them what the king had said unto
216

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him; and when they heard it they were exceedingly sorry. And the archbishop prayed and
entreated God to deliver him from brotherhood with Cyril, the Liar. And Cyril took much
money and fled from the country of Ethiopia and came to the country of Dahluka, and the
King of Dahluka seized him and took away all [his money], and bound him in fetters and
sent him to King of Egypt, who shut him up in prison for seven months and after this
period cut off his head with the sword. Thus Cyril died an evil death, and God accepted
the prayer of this father. And Abba Gabra Krestos sat upon the throne of Mark the
Evangelist thirty years, and he pleased God and died in peace. Salutation to Gabra
Krestos.
And on this day also Abba Ammonius, the Glorious, Bishop of the city of ‘Asna (‘Esna),
became a martyr. And when Arianus [the governor] came to the city of ‘Asna (‘Esna) he
found all the men of the city gathered together to Abba Ammonius and learning the word
of the Faith; and straightway he killed them all. And he seized Abba Ammonius, and
bound him, and took him to the city of ‘Asna (‘Esna), and he pressed him strongly to offer
incense of the gods, and to worship them. And Ammonius said unto him, “It is written,
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve. I take no pleasure in
your vain and silly fables, and I will not hearken to your words, and I will not look upon
your unclean gods, and I will not walk in your ruined temple, and I will neither touch your
stinking incense nor your foul offerings.” And when Arianus the governor saw that the
mind of the saint would neither abandon [his belief] nor change, he commanded his
soldiers to burn him alive. And Abba Ammonius asked the soldiers to wait a little whilst
he prayed. And he stood up with his hands and feet bound, and he prayed the prayer of the
Gospel, and he blessed his city and the men thereof, and all the people who believed on
Christ. And he prayed for Arianus the governor, and prophesied that he would become a
martyr, and he prayed also for the release of his soul; and when he had finished his prayer
they threw him into the mouth of the fire, and he finished his good contest. When the fire
was extinguished they found his pure body untouched, and they swathed it for burial in
costly cloths, and they buried him on the west side of the city of ‘Ensna, in the fortress
which Queen ‘Akalu-ubaters (Cleopatra), the daughter of Ptolemy, had built, and mighty
deeds and miracles innumerable were wrought through him there. Salutation to
Ammonius.
And on this day also died the daughter of the Emperor of Rome, whose name was Nasahit,
according to what James, Bishop of Wasim, saith concerning her: “And it came to pass
one day whilst I was sitting in the church of our holy Lady, the Virgin Maryam, the Godbearer, that I heard a monk knocking at the door of the monastery, and I rose up to see who
he was. And I saw that he had on an old cloak, and that his body was dried up; and his
face was muffled up and covered over. And I said unto him, ‘Whence comest thou, and
whither goest thou?’ And he said unto me, ‘I have come from the monastery of Abba
Macarius and I wish to pass this night in this monastery, so that I may receive the
Offering’; now it was one day from the Sabbath. And I said unto him, ‘I cannot open the
doors to thee unless thou wilt show me thy face.’ And he said unto me, ‘Seek not the sight
of my face, for my face is detestable like my sins, and whosoever sees my face shall see at
the same time all my evil works’; and because I refused to [admit] him he wanted to go
back into the desert. And then I thought within myself that he might be hungry, or thirsty,
and for this reason I opened the doors to him, and I brought him into my abode; and I
brought him food, but he refused it, and he said unto me, ‘I will not eat before to-morrow,
after the Offering.’ Then he went into the church, and he stood up in a dark place, and I
217

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
heard a sound, as it were the sound of angels, repeating the Psalms; and the brethren who
were there marveled. And in the morning the monk sat down on his feet, and did not want
to say anything. And we drew nigh unto him that we might ask him to pray for us, and he
said unto us, ‘How can I possibly pray for you seeing that I am blackened of face and [am
laden] with many transgressions?’ And when we offered up the Offering he stood up upon
his feet, and began to recite the Gospel of John, and he drew back his cowl from his face,
and it was impossible to look upon him by reason of the great light, which was upon it.
And after we had received the Offering, he received, [and we thought that he must be one
of] the children of the emperor. And we brought him food, but he would not take it, and he
exhorted us to turn away from the lust for women whereby Satan leads monks astray. And
there was there a certain good elder monk who was a Roman by birth, and he said unto me,
‘O my father James, this is a woman, and a daughter of emperors, and therefore she hides
her face so that we may not recognize her.’ Then I went to her to adjure her in the Name
of Christ not to hide her history from us, and straightway I lost her and could not find her.
Five months later there arrived many men, who had been sent by the emperor to search for
her, and they told us her history, and how she had escaped by night from Rome, and how
they had been searching for her for twelve years and had not found her. And then by the
Will of God certain pilgrims told us that she had died on this day [of the month
Takhshash].” Salutation to princess Nasahit. Salutation to the light, which illumined the
darkness. Salutation to the Light, which was before the world.
Salutation to Arianus the priest, and to ‘Arkisos, his God-fearing brother, the sons of
Gregory. [This salutation is wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 15
(December 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Gregory, Archbishop of Armenia, who became a martyr, without the
shedding of his blood. Tiridates, the King of Armenia, as we have already said, tortured
this saint severely because he would not worship his idols, and after he had tortured him he
cast him into a dry pit where he remained for fifteen years; and God was with him. And
God caused a certain old woman to bring him food every [week], and no one knew how he
lived. And the emperor having slain the virgins of ‘Arsima, and herself also, because he
wished to marry her, the bodies of the virgins were cast out on the hills. And when
seventy days had passed since they died, the emperor sorrowed for what he had done to
them, and more especially for what he had done to ‘Arsima. Then his friends asked him
and said unto him, “Mount thy horse and go forth into the desert and hunt the wild animals,
and so remove sorrow from thy heart.” And having mounted his horse, he went out into
the desert with all his soldiers, and at that same moment Satan mounted the horse and cast
the emperor from it; and the king bit his own body, and the bodies of his attendants. And
God changed his appearance and he became like unto the wild boar of the desert, and he
continued to go round about in the desert, and he bit everyone he met. And thus also was it
with the men of his palace, for Satan mounted upon their horses and there was great
218

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
dismay and outcry in the palace. All this took place because of the [slaughter of the] holy
virgins and of those who were with them. And the sister of the king saw a vision in the
night and it seemed as if a man said unto her, “If thou dost not bring up Saint Gregory
from the pit, ye shall never have relief, and never be healed of your sickness.” And she
told this to every man in the royal palace, and they were in a state of dismay because of
this, and they trembled because they thought that he was already dead in the pit. Then they
rose up straightway and went to the pit, and they let down a rope into the pit to see if he
was still alive, and they cried out to him to hang on to the rope which they had thrown to
him. And he seized the rope, which they had thrown down to him, and grasped it tightly
with his hands, and straightway they pulled him up, and lifted him up out of the pit; and
they washed him, and arrayed him in new apparel and they mounted him on a mule, and
brought him into the royal palace. And Gregory asked them questions concerning the
bodies of the holy virgins, and they guided him and brought him to the place where the
virgins were, and he found that they had been preserved from the wild beasts of the desert
and fowl of the heavens. And he commanded [the king’s servants] to build for them a
beautiful tomb, which should be worthy of them, and he laid them therein with great
honor. Then the people asked him to heal the king, and to drive out from him the Satan of
which he was possessed. And the saint had the king brought, and he said unto him, “Wilt
thou turn from thy evil works?” And the king made a sign of consent with his head. And
the saint prayed over him, and he cast out the Satan from him, and his heart (i.e. senses)
returned, and his appearance became what it had been originally; but God allowed some
traces of the claws of the wild boar to remain in the nails of his hands and feet, so that he
should not become haughty again, and he was submissive and humble. And the saint also
healed all the men of the royal palace, and cast out Satans from them. And then he
commanded them to gather together all the men of Armenia, and he gave them a Canon,
and commanded them to fast every eighth day; and they did as he commanded them. And
he continued to exhort them, and to teach them the way of God, and concerning the
Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. And they all hearkened unto him, small and great,
and this is the origin of the belief of the Armenians in Christ. And they asked Saint
Gregory to baptized them with Christian baptism, and he said unto them, “It is not seemly
for me to do this, for I am not a priest.” And they sent messengers to the country of Lunya,
and they wrote letters to the Emperor Honorius, and informed him that they had turned to
God, and asked him to appoint Gregory their Archbishop; and they asked the Archbishop
of Rome also, who was in those days Saint Lawendeyos. And with their letters they sent
many gifts for the Emperor Honorius, and Saint Gregory also was with them. And their
messengers came to the emperor and to the archbishop, and they read their letters to the
emperor and to the archbishop, and the emperor and the archbishop rejoiced because the
men of Armenia had turned to God, and they appointed Gregory Archbishop in the country
of Caesarea, and they sent him back with great honor to Tiridates, and King of Armenia.
And when Saint Gregory arrived in the country of Armenia the people rejoiced with a very
great joy because of his coming to them. Then he built them a beautiful church in the
name of our Lady Mary, and corrected the Faith of all their churches. And then the blessed
Gregory finished his course nobly, and he died in peace. Salutation to Gregory who lived
in a pit for three (sic) years, and suffered torture through the cold of the night, and the heat
of the day.
And on this day also died Saint Luke of the pillar. Salutation to him who fought the
spiritual fights in iron fetters, and slew Mastema (i.e. Satan), and who fated six days in
each week.
219

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also Yemsah became a martyr. Salutation to Abba Yemsah.
And on this day also became holy martyrs Herwag, Ananias, Kazi from the city of
Akhmim; and Sansaradin and ‘Awganyos (Eugenius) from the city of Gawer; and on this
day Miriam, the sister of Aaron, is commemorated. [This paragraph is given under Day
XVI in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 16
(December 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Gideon, one of the judges of Israel. This just man Gideon was of the tribe
of Menasseh and his father’s name was Joas; and the angel of the Lord appeared and
helped him, and strengthened him, and made him judge over the children of Israel. And he
commanded him to destroy the altar of idols, and to build an altar to God, and to offer up
burnt offerings upon it; and Gideon burnt with fire the wooden idols, which were broken in
pieces, and he did as the Lord commanded. And God also commanded him to make war
upon the men of Midian, and he asked God to show him a sign, so that his heart might be
strengthened thereby. And this was the sign: [He said] “Let me lay the carded woolly
fleece of a sheep among the grass of the field; if the fleece be wetted by the dew and the
grass of the field is not wetted, then shall I know that Thou art with me.” And he laid the
fleece among the grass, and it was wetted, but the grass was not wetted. And on the
following day he said, “O my Lord, behold I will lay the fleece among the grass again; if
the grass be wetted and the ground, and the fleece is not wetted, then I shall know that
Thou art with me and that Thou wilt fight for me.” And he did this on the following day,
and it happened even as he wished. Then his heart waxed strong, and the spirit of power
descended upon him from God, and he blew a horn and all the children of Israel gathered
together to him. And God said unto him, “The people are too many, for when they
conquer their enemies they will say that they themselves have conquered them by their
own power. But let a herald go round about among them and say, ‘If there be anyone here
who is timid or afraid, let him depart’”; and when the herald had been among these there
turned back twenty-two thousand of the children of Israel. And then God said unto
Gideon, “Even now those who are left are too many. Send them to the water and
command them to drink water, and he who drinks water with his tongue like a dog, take all
these, and set them apart from those who remain.” And straightway Gideon took them to
the river, and they drank water as God commanded, and the number of those who drank
water with their tongues like dogs were three hundred men. And God said unto him,
“With these I will deliver thee, and I will give the men of Midian into thy hand.” And that
night they blew trumpets among them, and they said, “The army of God and of Gideon.”
And when the men of Midian heard the sound of the trumpets, God set fear in their hearts,
and they were terrified and took to flight. And each man killed his neighbor next to him,
and they slew their princes Oreb and Zeeb, and they slew two of their kings Zebhel and
Zalmunna, and they slew of the men of Midian one hundred thousand, and twenty
thousand horsemen; and the children of Israel rejoiced that day. And they said unto
220

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Gideon, “Be thou king over us, and thy children after thee.” And he answered and said
unto them with lowliness of heart, “Neither am I worthy to be king nor are my children
worthy to be kings over you, but it is God Who shall rule over you [as] king. But let each
one of you give me the torque of gold which is on the head of every camel which ye have
carried off as spoil”; and they brought them to him. And the amount of gold and silver
which they gave him was one hundred thousand seven hundred dinars, besides the
ornaments of the women, and the rich trappings which were on the camels. And Gideon,
the just, continued to rule the children of Israel for forty years, and God was with him in all
his work; and then he died in peace and was buried in the grave of his father.
Salutation to Gideon, the mighty man. By the miracle of the wetted fleece mentioned
above is made manifest the Birth of Christ of Mary.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 17
(December 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the translation of the body of Saint Luke of the pillar, who came
from the country of Persia. He was the captain of one hundred soldiers, but he gave up his
appointment, and assumed the garb of the monastic life, and took up his abode in one of
the monasteries of the country of the East; and he dwelt therein many days. And when he
had finished his ascetic training and his spiritual fight showed his excellences, he was
made a priest in that monastery. And at the time of his appointment he dressed himself in
iron, and he wore this dress as long as he dwelt in that monastery; and he devoted himself
to fasting, and from that day he fasted seven days and seven nights at a time. On the
Seventh Day he consecrated the Offering, and partook of the Holy Mysteries, and then he
ate a small bread cake and some herbs. After this he went up on the top of a pillar, and
stood thereon for three years, and he heard the voice of an angel calling him by name, and
commanding him to get down from the pillar. And the angel showed him a cross of light,
and Luke descended and followed the voice, which he heard. And the cross (of light)
guided him until it brought him to a certain monastery, and he dwelt therein many days,
and all the men came to him and were comforted by his doctrine. Then he became a
devotee of silence, and he put a stone in his mouth so that he might not talk at all with any
man. Then God commanded him to go to the borders of the city of Constantinople, and he
went to a certain village which was near it, and he went up on the top of a pillar, and he
dwelt thereon for five and forty years and fought a great spiritual fight. And God gave him
the gift of prophecy, and he performed signs and wonders, and he healed all the sick folk
who came to him. And God willing that he should leave the toil of this world, Luke died
on the fifteenth day of the month of Takhshash; and he who ministered unto him went and
told the archbishop and the priests concerning his death. And the archbishop and the
priests rose up, and carrying crosses and censers they came to his abode, and they prayed
over him, and they took him up and carried him to the city of Constantinople, three days
after he died. And they brought him thither on the seventeenth day of the month of
Takhshash, and laid him in the sanctuary, and they finished the prayer for the third hour
221

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
over his holy body; and all those who were gathered together were blessed by him. Then
they put him in a sarcophagus wherein were the bodies of the saints who were his
predecessors, and God made manifest from his body many signs and wonders, and [many
derived] very great benefit there from, and it healed all the sick who came to it in faith.
Salutation to Luke, the pillar-saint.
And on this day also are commemorated the holy martyrs ‘Eusoryays (Aularianus), and
‘Euthyos, and Suryan, and Mark, and Bartelel, and Nathaniel, the monk and toiler in the
ascetic life.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 18
(December 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated Abba Salama, the revealer of the light, for he was the light
of Ethiopia; and behold the story of his strife is written in the section for the twentyseventh day of the month Hamle. Salutation to Abba Salama.
And on this day also took place the translation of the body of the great Saint Titus, the
Apostle, the disciple of Paul the Apostle. Constantine the Just, the great emperor of
emperors, translated the body from ‘Akrates (Crete) to the city of Constantinople. When
by the Will of God, Constantine reigned, he took very careful thought for the churches and
the works thereof, and he beautified with fine decorations all the churches, which were in
his kingdom, and especially those in the city of Constantinople, for, that was the seat of his
sovereignty. And he inspected every work, and he wished [the builders] to beautify them
with every kind of decoration, and with pearl-stone (mother-of-pearl), and costly stones;
and he also made them glorious with spiritual stones and celestial gems. And the bodies of
the apostles were gathered together to him, and such of the bodies of the honorable martyrs
as he could find. And when he heard that the body of Saint Titus the apostle was in the
city of ‘Akrates (Crete) he sent the chief priests, and with them much money, and they
took the body of Saint Titus with great honor, and brought it to the city of Constantinople.
And he built a beautiful church, and he placed the body in a coffer of very precious stone,
and laid it in the church. And God made manifest many exceedingly great signs and
miracles through it. And as they were carrying Saint Titus to bring him into the sanctuary,
the end of the stone coffer dropped upon the foot of one of its carriers, and crushed it, and
the bones thereof. And that man took some of the oil of the lamp which was hanging
before the picture of Saint Titus in faith, and he smeared his foot therewith and tied it up,
crying out by reason of the pain as he did so; and as he could not walk home to his house,
he passed the night by the side of the coffer containing the saint. And on the following day
he unbandaged his foot to look at it, and to apply the means of healing to it, and he found
that it was sound and well like the other, and there was no pain in it whatsoever, and he
found on it only traces of the marks of blood; and all those who saw this miracle marveled
exceedingly, and they glorified God. And the man rose up and washed away the blood,
and he walked about as usual without any pain, and he glorified God. And the miracles of
222

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
this holy Apostle Titus were many. Salutation to the translation of the body of Titus the
disciple of Paul.
And on this day also died Arkila, and Philemon, the priest and anchorite who became a
martyr. Salutation to Arkila, and Philemon.
And on this day also are commemorated Farkayon, and Silikion, and Galinicus, and
‘Eunas, and their companion who were martyred; and the translation of the bodies of
‘Arsis, and Dacia, and Dimon; [‘Arsis, Dacia and Dimon are not mentioned in the
Bodleian MS.] and the translation of the body of Thomas the Apostle. And countless signs
appeared through his body, and they built a beautiful church for him on the river, and they
laid the body of the saint therein.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 19
(December 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the honorable father, Abba John, Bishop of the city of Burles. This holy
man was a member of a priestly family, and his parents were people of high rank, and they
gave of their goods to the poor and needy. When his parents died he took the money
which they had left him and he built therewith a church, and he also built a guest house
wherein pilgrims and sick folk gathered together; and he himself ministered unto them, and
brought to them whatsoever they wanted. And at that time there came to him a certain
monk, and he saw what he was doing, and this monk praised the ascetic life to him and
made manifest to him the honor thereof; and after that monk had departed, he gave all his
goods to the poor, and he went into the desert of Scete in the days of Abba Daniel, Abbot
of the desert of Scete, and he became a monk with him and fought a great fight. And then
he dwelt alone in his cell, and the Satans envied him because of his good fight, and they
beat him very severely, and finally he was obliged to lie prostrate for many days because
of the beatings wherewith the Satans beat him. After this our Lord Christ healed him, and
he became strong in His power and overcame the Satans and, after this, by the Will of
God, he was made Bishop of the city of Burles; now in his days there was much dissension
(or schism) in the cities. And he toiled with great labor to pluck out the tares from among
the wheat, and he turned many people from their schism and brought them into the True
Faith. And in those days there was a certain monk from Upper Egypt, who talked much,
and he used to say, “Michael revealeth it to me”; and he led astray many men. And when
the saint knew that his work was evil, and that he was of Satan, he commanded [his
servants] to seize him and to beat him; and when they had beaten him the man confessed
his error, and they removed him from the city. And there was another [monk] who used to
say, “Anthony the prophet appeared unto me and told me many mysteries”; and very many
men followed him. And the saint took that man, and put an end to his teaching, and he
destroyed and tore in pieces all the books whereby he introduced schisms into the church.
And every time when John went up into the sanctuary to consecrate the Offering, his face
used to become like fire, and his body like fire, and he seemed to be like one who was
223

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
issuing from a fiery furnace. And when he began to recite the Liturgy tears used to roll
down his face like rain, for he could see clearly the hosts of the angels on the altar; and
again [he saw them] when he said, “Holy” thrice. And when he laid his fingers upon the
cup to sign the Offering with the Cross, at the moment of breaking the bread he would find
that it was like burning fire. And in his days there were evil men and heretics, whom Satan
led into error, who offered up the Offering twice a day, after they had eaten; and he
anathematized them and excommunicated them so that [men] might not do this evil thing.
And when they would not hearken to his voice, he prayed to God concerning them, and his
petition was accepted, and God sent down fire from heaven and consumed their leader; and
when those who remained saw this they feared exceedingly and entered the True Faith.
And then God wished to give John rest from the labor of this fleeting world, and He sent
unto him the Saints Abba Anthony and Abba Macarius to inform him of the time of his
death. Then John gathered together the people and commanded them to love each other,
and to be strong in the True Faith, and then he lay down upon his bed and died in peace.
Salutation to John who at the time of the Eucharist found the cup red-hot.
And on this day also [the Babylonians] threw Ananias, Azarias, and Misael into the
furnace.
And on this day also is celebrated the great Festival of the Annunciation of Gabriel the
angel [to our Lady Mary].
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 20
(December 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the honorable father, Abba John, Bishop of the city of Burles. This holy
man was a member of a priestly family, and his parents were people of high rank, and they
gave of their goods to the poor and needy. When his parents died he took the money
which they had left him and he built therewith a church, and he also built a guest house
wherein pilgrims and sick folk gathered together; and he himself ministered unto them, and
brought to them whatsoever they wanted. And at that time there came to him a certain
monk, and he saw what he was doing, and this monk praised the ascetic life to him and
made manifest to him the honor thereof; and after that monk had departed, he gave all his
goods to the poor, and he went into the desert of Scete in the days of Abba Daniel, Abbot
of the desert of Scete, and he became a monk with him and fought a great fight. And then
he dwelt alone in his cell, and the Satans envied him because of his good fight, and they
beat him very severely, and finally he was obliged to lie prostrate for many days because
of the beatings wherewith the Satans beat him. After this our Lord Christ healed him, and
he became strong in His power and overcame the Satans and, after this, by the Will of
God, he was made Bishop of the city of Burles; now in his days there was much dissension
(or schism) in the cities. And he toiled with great labor to pluck out the tares from among
the wheat, and he turned many people from their schism and brought them into the True
Faith. And in those days there was a certain monk from Upper Egypt, who talked much,
224

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and he used to say, “Michael revealeth it to me”; and he led astray many men. And when
the saint knew that his work was evil, and that he was of Satan, he commanded [his
servants] to seize him and to beat him; and when they had beaten him the man confessed
his error, and they removed him from the city. And there was another [monk] who used to
say, “Anthony the prophet appeared unto me and told me many mysteries”; and very many
men followed him. And the saint took that man, and put an end to his teaching, and he
destroyed and tore in pieces all the books whereby he introduced schisms into the church.
And every time when John went up into the sanctuary to consecrate the Offering, his face
used to become like fire, and his body like fire, and he seemed to be like one who was
issuing from a fiery furnace. And when he began to recite the Liturgy tears used to roll
down his face like rain, for he could see clearly the hosts of the angels on the altar; and
again [he saw them] when he said, “Holy” thrice. And when he laid his fingers upon the
cup to sign the Offering with the Cross, at the moment of breaking the bread he would find
that it was like burning fire. And in his days there were evil men and heretics, whom Satan
led into error, who offered up the Offering twice a day, after they had eaten; and he
anathematized them and excommunicated them so that [men] might not do this evil thing.
And when they would not hearken to his voice, he prayed to God concerning them, and his
petition was accepted, and God sent down fire from heaven and consumed their leader; and
when those who remained saw this they feared exceedingly and entered the True Faith.
And then God wished to give John rest from the labor of this fleeting world, and He sent
unto him the Saints Abba Anthony and Abba Macarius to inform him of the time of his
death. Then John gathered together the people and commanded them to love each other,
and to be strong in the True Faith, and then he lay down upon his bed and died in peace.
Salutation to John who at the time of the Eucharist found the cup red-hot.
And on this day also [the Babylonians] threw Ananias, Azarias, and Misael into the
furnace.
And on this day also is celebrated the great Festival of the Annunciation of Gabriel the
angel [to our Lady Mary].
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 21
(December 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated a commemorative festival of our holy Lady the Virgin Maryam,
the God-bearer. Salutation to Maryam, who found seed without drinking the dew, and
without drinking from the fountain, and who appeared unto Isaac from out of her icon.
And on this day became a martyr the holy apostle and great prophet Barnabas, which
name, being interpreted, means “son of consolation.” This blessed and holy man was from
the country of Cyprus, and was of the tribe of Levi, and his original name was Joseph.
And the Lord chose him to be of the number of the Seventy-two disciples, whom He sent
out to preach before His Passion, and He called his name Barnabas. Then the Holy Spirit
Paraclete descended upon him when he was in the chamber of Zion with the Apostles, and
225

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
he preached the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he owned a garden, and he sold it
and brought the price thereof and gave it to the Apostles. And when Paul the Apostle
believed, and our Lord Christ was mingling with the Apostles, and many of them did [not]
believe that Paul was a disciple of Christ, this Barnabas came to the Apostles and brought
Paul unto them. And he became a witness to them on his behalf that Paul was a disciple of
our Lord Christ, and he told them how our Lord Christ had appeared unto him and talked
with him. And Barnabas went with Paul to many cities, and they preached in the Name of
our Lord Christ. And the Holy Spirit said unto the Apostles, “Separate ye for Me Barnabas
and Saul for the work.” And when they came into the city of Lystra and preached, and
Paul healed the paralytic who was therein, this Barnabas was with him. And when the men
of the city wished to offer sacrifices to them, and called them “gods,” they would not
accept the honoring of me, but they rent their garments and confessed that they were men
even as they were. And after Barnabas had gone with Paul to many cities, he separated
from him, and he took Mark with him to Cyprus, and they preached there, and converted
very many of the men thereof to the True Faith of Christ, and baptized them with Christian
baptism. And the Jews of the country of Cyprus became envious of him, and they made
accusations against him before the governor, and before those who were in authority. And
they seized him and gave him a severe and painful beating, and then they stoned him with
stones, and then they dragged his body out from under the stones, and they burnt him with
fire and he finished his martyrdom. And the Apostle Mark the evangelist was with him,
and God kept him and preserved him to preach in the city of Alexandria and in all the
regions round about it. And they took out [the body] of Saint Barnabas from the fire, and
he was whole and uninjured, and the fire had not touched him at all, and they carried him
out, and swathed him in costly cloths, and laid him in a cave outside the city of Cyprus.
Salutation to Barnabas and salutation to Mark. Salutation to our Shepherd like Whom
there never hath been any and never shall be any.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
TAHISAS 22
(December 31)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the glorious angel, Gabriel the Archangel, who
made the Annunciation [to our Lady Mary]. And on this day is celebrated the building of
the church in the city of Danah, wherein the angel showed forth his miracles, and also the
dedication thereof; and of what took place Archelaus, bishop of this city is witness. It was
this glorious angel who was sent by God to the holy Virgin Mary, and he was by far the
most glorious of all the angels, and most to be trusted to make the Annunciation to her.
When he came unto the Virgin he said unto her, “Peace be unto thee! Rejoice, O thou who
art full of grace! The Lord is with thee.” And it was Gabriel who announced the glad
tidings of the birth of his son John to Zachariah; exceedingly great honor do they pay to
this angel Gabriel, and great is the honor of him that is chosen as an announcer of glad
tidings. And it is meet for us now to gather together at this great and holy festival in the
True Faith, and let us put away hatred, and make peace among ourselves, and agree with
our neighbor, and love each other, and let us crucify our minds (or thoughts) with God the
Merciful, so that He may look upon us and have compassion upon us. And with all our
hearts let us make supplication to this glorious angel Gabriel, and his companion Michael,
226

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
who are glorious and exalted in their offices to pray to God on our behalf that He may
deliver us and protect us against the nets of Satan; for without the help of God and the
intercession of His chosen ones we can in no wise be saved. Now the meaning of the name
Gabriel is “God and man,” and it was Gabriel who made the announcement [to the
shepherds], and said, “This day is born unto you a Savior, Who is Christ God.” Salutation
to thy house in the city of Danoh (sic), O Gabriel, which Archelaus, bishop of the city,
consecrated.
Salutation to Dekesius, Bishop of Telteya, to whom Mary gave heavenly apparel, because
he wrote the account of the miracle of her Annunciation.
And on this day died the holy father Abba Anastasius, the thirty-sixth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This holy man was the son of a nobleman of the city of Alexandria,
and he was a judge in the royal palace; he was next made a priest of the Alexandrian
Church, and by the Will of God he was appointed archbishop. And having been appointed
this father took thought for the churches, and he built several churches, and he set in them
places for the bishops and priests. And he took many churches from the Melchites, now he
knew not their number, and some churches of the Jacobites, because he was held in honor
among them for his learning, and faith, and virtues; and he converted many of them to the
True Faith. In those days the Emperor Constantine died, and he was succeeded by another
emperor whose faith was corrupt. And one of the evil men sent a letter, and made an
accusation against this holy father to him, saying, “When Anastasius, Archbishop of the
Jacobites, goeth through the church, the people anathematize the emperor and his faith, and
this father Anastasius (Antonius?) doeth nothing in the matter.” When the emperor had
read the letter of this evil man, he was exceedingly angry, and he sent to the governor of
Alexandria and commanded him to take from this holy father Anastasius the church of
Saints Cosmas and Damianus, and all his possessions, and to give them to Eusegnius,
Archbishop of Rome. And this father sorrowed greatly by reason of this, but God, Who
searches hearts, comforted him, and destroyed Peter the heretic, Archbishop of Antioch,
and He appointed to succeed him a righteous and learned monk whose name was Atesius.
And this father sent to him an epistle concerning the True Faith, and he rejoiced at its
coming to him, and he gathered together the bishops and the priests and read this epistle
before them, and they rejoiced therein, and they marveled at the words which were written
there, and at the knowledge of the writer. And Athenasius, Archbishop of the city of
Antioch, rose up, and taking with him bishops, and priests, and deacons, he came to the
city of Alexandria. And this father Anastasius went out and met Abba Athanasius, now he
had with him bishops, and priests, and deacons and monks, and the chief of the Jews, and
then Abba Athanasius said, “O my beloved ones, it is meet that we should take up the harp
of David, the prophet, and sing the words of the Psalm, ‘Compassion and truth have met
together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other’. Athanasius and Anastasius
have embraced each other, righteousness hath appeared in the land of Egypt, and truth hath
sprung up out of the East. Egypt and Syria have become one Faith, and the cities of
Alexandria and Antioch one church, and there is one virgin to one holy man, our Lord
Christ, the Only Son, the Word of God the Father.” And Saint Athanasius lived with Saint
Anastasius in the same monastery for a period of thirty days, and they taught each other,
and discussed together, and searched out the roots of the Faith; and then Abba Athanasius
returned in peace to this own country. And the country of Alexandria and the country of
Antioch were at one in one True Faith. And this father Anastasius taught his flock things,
which were profitable for their souls from the Book of Life. And because of the greatness
227

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
of his wisdom, and his knowledge, he used to put at the beginning of each of his writings
and letters each year one letter of the alphabet; thus at the beginning of all his writings and
letters written during the first year he wrote the letter A, and at the beginning of all those
written during the second year the letter B, and at the beginning of all those written during
the third year the letter ‘? ‘ and so on to the end of the alphabet. [Oriental 667 says that he
wrote 12,000 letters during the twelve years in which he held office.] And when the fast of
the Birth of Christ came he became a little sick, and died in peace in the thirty-first (sic)
year of the Holy Martyrs (A.D. 315?). Salutation to Anastasius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 23
(January 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the saint and fighter Abba Timothy, the desert monk. This holy man had
God-loving parents who brought him up piously, and taught him the doctrine of the
Church; and he wished to adopt the garb of the monastic life, and he went forth from his
father and dwelt in a monastery and became a monk therein. And he determined in his
mind to live by himself in a place near the monastery, so that he might receive pilgrims
and poor people, and feed them. And he went forth from the monastery and built himself a
house near it, and he dwelt therein for a period of five years; and he fought the spiritual
fight and worked with his hands and lived by the labor thereof. And the Enemy of good
laid a plot against him, and he brought to him a certain widow to buy from him the work of
his hands. And because of this business her coming to him was frequent, and sinful love
sprang up between them, and they sat together at the time of eating their meals. Then the
monk burned with the fever of fornication, and they fell into sin, and they continued to do
the work of sin for seven months. But God neither abandoned them, nor cast them away,
neither the woman nor Saint Timothy, but He made them to remember the time of death,
and that they would have to stand before the King of kings, our Lord Jesus Christ, on that
fearful and terrible day. And straightway Abba Timothy began to reproach himself and to
revile himself, and he rose up from that place and came into the desert, and God the Most
High guided him to a little oasis in the desert, wherein there were a tree and a spring of
sweet running water. And he went into it and found a date palm there, and he dwelt in that
place for many days. And then Satan became jealous of him because he had saved himself,
and he brought upon him a serious disease in his belly, and by reason of the intensity of his
pain he had fallen face downwards on the earth. And as he lay bowed there he prayed, and
he said unto his soul, “This pain is the fruit of the sin which thou hast committed, O soul.
Thou must endure the tribulation of this pain in order to become healed of thy sickness”;
and he continued to suffer the pain for four years. And after this God looked upon him,
and he sent to him an angel who rubbed the belly of Timothy with his hand, and he was
healed of the pain which was in his belly. And then the angel made a slit in his side with
his fingers [and took out his liver] and cleaned it and restored it to its place in his bowels,
and he fastened it to his body and Timothy recovered and became as he was before his
sickness. And the angel said unto him, “Behold thou art sound; take good heed not to
offend a second time lest worse befall thee.” He lived in the desert fighting the fight and
228

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
was a strict ascetic for forty years, and before this he lived in a monastery seventeen years,
and he also lived in a cave for ten years. And during all the years wherein he dwelt in the
desert he went naked and had no clothing, but God, the Most High, made his hair long, and
it covered him before and behind. And by his strict asceticism, and strenuous fighting, and
worship of God, grace came upon him in such an abundant measure that the wild beasts
used to visit him, and lick the dust of his feet; and he pleased God and he died in peace
wearing the crown of his fight. Salutation to Timothy.
And on this day also died David the Just, King and Prophet, and son of Jesse. This [saint]
became king over Israel after Saul, the King, the son of Kish, of the tribe of Benjamin.
And before he was king he followed a good course of life, and he fought the fight, and he
performed righteousness and judgment more than any other king of Israel. And he was of
the tribe of Judah from Bethlehem, and God chose him to be king over Israel. And God
sent Samuel the prophet to anoint one of the sons of Jesse with the oil of sovereignty, so
that he might be king over Israel. And Samuel the prophet chose the eldest son of Jesse,
because he was goodly in appearance, and robust in body, but God did not choose him, and
said unto him, “O Samuel, look not upon him that is of goodly appearance, and consider
not the height of his stature, for I am not like men who look at the external goodly
appearance; I try the heart and the reins, and I know the things that are secret.” And after
this Samuel chose David to reign over Israel, and God was with him in all his work. And
by reason of his excessive innocence of heart and gentleness he found Saul his enemy on
several occasions, and he did no evil whatsoever to him; and he allowed him to escape
when Saul himself was wishing to kill David. One day Saul went forth seeking for David
to kill him, and when the evening came Saul lay down and slept, and all his soldiers slept
round about him. And David the prophet came to Saul whilst he was asleep, and he cut off
the fringed hem of his garment to make Saul to know in secret that he (David) could have
killed him, and boasted himself over him, but he did no harm to him whatsoever. And then
David repented and was sorry that he had cut off the hem of Saul’s tunic. And David
found him a second time asleep, and he carried off his spear and the water-pot by his head,
but did him no harm. And when his men said unto him, “Kill thine enemy Saul,” David
answered and said unto them, “Far be it from me to put out my hand against the anointed
one of God.” And when a man told him the story of the killing of Saul his enemy, he said
unto him, “Who killed him?” And the man said unto him, “I killed him.” And David’s
heart was exceedingly sad, and he rent his garments and said unto that men, “Is it true that
thou didst kill him?” And the man said unto him, “Yea.” And David killed that man who
said, “I killed Saul.” Now God gathered together in this prophet many virtues, and of them
all the greatest was humility. And though he was king and prophet, and righteous, and
perfect, he called himself a “dead dog,” a “miserable wolf,” a “worm,” and a “beast,” and
with all this humility he was more glorious and exalted than all [other] kings. And God
praised him in many passages of Scripture, saying, “I have found David, the son of Jesse, a
man after My own heart, who will perform all I wish”; and God protected the children of
Israel and Jerusalem with good protection for David’s sake, both during his lifetime and
after his death. And God honored David by the mouth of His prophet, and He set over the
people kings from his seed, and He called David His son. And it is said in the Book of the
Psalms that he was well known to be a shield against Satans, and was full of every kind of
good work, and of every kind of glorious doctrine. And his complexion was pure red, like
the pomegranate; he was of a medium stature; and he was exceedingly strong and
powerful, for he was in the prime of youth, and God was his helper. And [once] when he
was keeping his father’s sheep there came to him a wolf, and a lion also came at the same
229

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
time to carry off some of his father’s sheep, and he killed the wolf, and snatched sway the
beard of the lion (I Sam. xvii, 34, 35). And when Saul was fighting against the Philistines,
an alien people, there went forth Golyad (Goliath), the giant, who was six cubits and a span
in height, and his whole body was covered with amour, and in his hand was a spear, the
shaft of which was as thick as a weaver’s beam, and the spear-head was of iron and the
weight thereof was six hundred shekels. And the helmet upon his head and all the
covering of him was of brass, and the weight of the iron covering which was on him was
five thousand shekels. And his legs had coverings of brass on them, and he had as it were
serpents between his shoulders and a covering of brass upon his breast; and an amour
bearer went before him. And he stood up and cried out to the children of Israel and said
unto them, “Why have ye come out to fight against us, and to do battle with us? Am I not
the Philistine, and are ye not Hebrews of Saul? Choose out from you a man who shall
come down to me. If he is able to fight against me and to slay me we will be [your]
servants; and if I am able to slay him, ye shall be our servants, and shall minister unto us.”
And he spoke thus, and he continued to revile the people of Israel, and to boast himself
over them for a space of forty days; and no one from among the armies of Israel dared to
go forth to him. And when Saul heard his voice he was dismayed and was afraid of that
Philistine. And in those days David came to visit his brethren, and when he saw that
Philistine, and heard his voice, he became full of divine zeal forthwith, and he said unto
Saul, “I will go and will slay this uncircumcised Philistine.” And Saul said unto David,
“Go, and God be with thee.” And David took in his hand a sling, and he chose three stones
from the brook and put them into his scrip, so that he might have them in addition to those
in the sling, which was in his hand; and he went out against that Philistine. And when
Golyad (Goliath), the Philistine, saw David, he scorned him, for he was a youth, and ruddy
like the pomegranate flower, and his eyes were beautiful. And this Philistine said unto
David, “Am I a dog that thou shouldst come out against me with a stick and with stones?”
And David said unto him, “Yea, thou art worse than a dog”; and this Philistine cursed
David by his gods. And he said unto him, “Come to me and I will give thy flesh to the
dogs, and to the birds of heaven, and to the beasts of the earth.” And David said unto him,
“Thou comest out against me with sword and a spear, and I come against thee in the Name
of the God of the armies which thou revilest this day, the armies of Israel, and I will take
thee and kill thee, and I will cut off thy head with the sword, and I will give thy carcass,
and the carcasses of thy followers, to the birds of the heavens and to the wild beasts of the
earth, and all the earth shall know that God is with Israel, and all the army of Israel shall
know that it is not by a sword and a spear that He delivereth, but that it is God Himself
Who hath slain [thee].” And David put his hand into his scrip, and took a stone from there,
and he slung it, and it smote the Philistine in his forehead, [and entered] his brain, and he
fell down upon his face on the earth. And David ran and took his sword, and slew him,
and cut off his head, and removed the reproach from the children of Israel. And all the
days of the life of David were seventy years; he was thirty years old before he was
anointed with the oil of sovereignty, and before he reigned over Israel, and he dwelt in his
sovereignty forty years. He prophesied eleven hundred and twenty years before the
Incarnation of our Lord Christ, and he died in peace and entered into the kingdom of
heaven, and he was buried in the sepulcher of his fathers. Salutation to David, the servant
of God.
And on this day also died Abba Samuel, and Abba Gabriel, and Abba Simon. This Abba
Samuel became a monk and anchorite, and dwelt by the side of a city, the name of which
was Kartamen. And there was there the funerary chest of a certain martyr whose name
230

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
was ‘Akrapos, and he used to invoke his blessing at the beginning and end of his prayer.
And there was a certain governor whose name was Saliba, and he had a son called Simon
who was sick with a fatal sickness, and he sent and fetched Abba Samuel to pray over his
son; and he prayed and raised him up after he was dead. And that young man followed
Abba Samuel, and became his disciple and a monk at the same time. One day that disciple
went out taking with him a pot to draw water, and Satan broke it; and when he told Abba
Samuel he gave him a wine-skin to fill with water, and the disciple used the skin for
fetching water for ten years, and the water did not spill over from it. And they departed
thence and went to another place where they built a little prayer house, and they dwelt
[there]. And one [night] the angel of the Lord showed them in a dream where they were to
build a church, and King ‘Anestos came and built them a large church, and five hundred
cells for monks. And having become profitable, Abba Samuel labored exceedingly, and
through excessive fighting in the spiritual fight, he departed to God Whom he loved,
leaving his children in the hand of his son Simon; and the monks multiplied and became
twelve thousand in number. In the days of this father there rose up a certain heretic who
did not believe in the resurrection of the dead, and Abba Simon prayed over a dead man,
and raised him up before him; and when the heretic would not turn his mind away from
doubt, the saint prayed to God, and brought down fire from heaven and consumed him.
And after this Abba Simon waxed old and died; and he died in peace and honor, and was
buried in the sepulcher of his master, and Abba Gabriel was appointed abbot after him. He
was humble and meek, and wore sackcloth and iron under his clothing, but he wore no
sandals on his feet. In the winter time he never entered a house, and in the summer time he
fasted from Saturday to Saturday, and he ate nothing except salt and bread; and he used to
work signs and miracles. One day his disciples wished to bring a large stone into the
monastery so that they might make yeast for the bread thereon, and they had no men to
carry it, and when Abba Gabriel heard of it he cursed because there was no one left in the
monastery to come and fetch the stone, and when the dead heard his voice they rose up to
the number of ten thousand and thirty souls. And when Abba Gabriel saw them he said
unto them, “It is not you whom I cursed, but the living,” and straightway they returned to
their sepulchers. One day a certain man deposited some gold with a monk, and departed
on a long journey, and when he came back he found that the monk was dead, and that he
had not told his disciple about the gold; and he questioned the disciple about the gold, but
he knew not where his master had put it. And Abba Gabriel went to the grave of the dead
monk and asked him about the money, and he told him where he had put it, and the owner
of the money having taken the money went away marveling. And he had a friend whose
name was Salib, and he died without meeting him again. When Abba Gabriel heard of
this, he went to his grave, and wept, and prayed and said, “In the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ rise up, and let us talk together,” and Salib rose up alive and lived for fourteen years
[after]. And in the days of this father a great persecution came upon the churches and the
Christians through the Roman emperors, and a countless number of people were slain; but
after a few days Islam reigned, and the Christians were delivered from the persecution.
And having fought the spiritual fight strenuously for twenty years Gabriel died in peace.
Salutation to Samuel, and Simon, and Gabriel.
And on this day also are commemorated Macarius, and Antedrius (Andreas), and Philip,
and Eiteltas (or ‘Ay-Taltas), and Cornelius, and Mercurius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
231

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TAHISAS 24
(January 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the righteous woman Esther (Aster), the daughter of the brother of
Mardochaeus (Mordecai), the daughter of the brother of Jeremiah the prophet. And there
was a man, a Jew, in the city of Sus, whose name was Aminadab, the son of Iyaeru, of the
tribe of Benjamin, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king carried off into captivity; and he had a
beautiful daughter whose name was Esther (Aster). When her father died she was brought
up in the house of Mardochaeus (Mordecai) her father’s brother. One day Arkaskesis
(Ahasuerus) the king made ready a great feast, and gathered together with great pomp his
governors, and the chief governor Hama (Haman), the Amalekite, who was the most
honorable of all his officers. And having summoned Queen Vashti to his table, she refused
to come, and sent back to him a message of derision; and because of this he was angry with
her, and he remove her from her royal rank. Then the king ordered his officers to choose
out for him one thousand women from all the cities of his kingdom, whereof of the number
was one hundred and seven. And out of the thousand they chose one hundred, and out of
the hundred ten, and out of the ten three, and of the three Esther (Aster) was found to excel
them all by far in beauty and wisdom. And the king made her the queen and he loved her
exceedingly; and Mardochaeus (Mordecai) continued to devote himself to the court of the
king, and he was not under the authority of Hama (Haman). Esther (Aster) went in to the
king in the twelfth month, in the month Hedar, in the seventh year of the king’s reign, and
she found very great favor before him. And Mardochaeus (Mordecai) having learned of a
conspiracy between two of the king’s messengers who wished to kill the king, came in to
the king and told him secretly; and when the king enquired into the matter, and found out
their guilt, he commanded [his soldiers] to kill them, and wrote down the good deed of
Mardochaeus (Mordecai). Now Hama (Haman) hated Mardochaeus (Mordecai) and all the
people of Israel, for he was an Amalekite, and he wished to destroy all the Jews, and to
create a tumult in all the city. When Mardochaeus (Mordecai) knew what was happening,
he rent his garments and put on sackcloth. And Esther (Aster) called a eunuch and sent
him to obtain news of Mardochaeus (Mordecai), and to hear what had become of him.
And Esther (Aster) made the man who had come to her [with news] from Mardochaeus
(Mordecai), to go back, and she commanded him, saying, “Go and gather together the Jews
who are in Susan and tell them to fast and eat not, and I and my maidens will fast.” And
one night God drove slumber away from the king, and he made them fetch the Book of the
Prophets to read, and he read the praise of Mardochaeus (Mordecai). And he commanded
Hama (Haman) to pay honor to Mardochaeus (Mordecai). And he commanded Hama
(Haman) to make the king’s sons to array him in purple, and to set him upon a horse, and
to make a herald to go before him and proclaim that he was the friend of the king. And for
this reason Hama (Haman) was jealous of Mardochaeus (Mordecai), and he prepared for
him a tree whereon to hang him. And after three days, having finished her prayers, Esther
(Aster) put off the garments of mourning, and put on glorious apparel, and came to the
king, and she did homage to him, and stood up facing him. And the king said unto her,
“What dost thou want, O Esther (Aster)?” And she said unto him, “If I have found favor
before the king, let my petition be granted unto me, for I and my people are sold to death
and destruction.” And the king said unto her, “Who hath dared to do this thing?” And
Esther (Aster) said unto him, “The enemy is Hama (Haman).” And when Hama (Haman)
232

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
heard this he feared the king. And when the king turned aside into the garden Hama
(Haman) bowed down at the feet of Esther (Aster) to pay homage to her, and when the
king found him with her he was filled with wrath, and he said unto him, “Wouldst thou
force my wife in my own house?” Then he commanded his soldiers to hang Hama
(Haman) upon the tree, which he had prepared for Mardochaeus (Mordecai), and thus he
performed the prayer of Esther (Aster). Salutation to Esther (Aster).
Salutation to Aboli, whose head was cut off in a tank of water. Salutation to Felhasius, the
ascetic, Basil, who was hacked in pieces, and Arius, who was sent into exile. Salutation to
the righteous fathers of the city of Kadih Aswan, who enriched the poor.
Salutation to thy birth, seeing that thy mother had long remained barren, O Takla
Haymanot, the sun who conquereth time, with whose praise the earth is filled from one
boundary to the other, and with whose righteousness heaven is covered. [The above
salutations are wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also died Abba Pawli who disputed with Satan in the city of Samer, which
is called Salonkeya (Thessalonica). Now the men thereof were kinsmen of Herod, and
they were wicked; and they had the custom of going into the bath the men and the women
together. And Abba Pawli came to that city, now he had a young deacon with him, and he
found the people, both men and women, going into the baths together on the Fourth Day of
the week. And when Abba Pawli saw [this] he marveled exceedingly, and he said unto one
of them, “Why do ye do this abominable thing?” And the man said unto him, “As we
consort with our wives on our couches even so we consort with them in the bath.” And
when the night was come, and men were asleep, Abba Pawli began to pray to God with
anguish of heart to smite the people a severe blow. And when he had finished his prayer
he saw a black man coming from the bathhouse carrying a sword, which was like fire.
And Abba Pawli said unto him, “Who art thou and what dost thou seek?” And the black
man said unto him, “I am Satan. God hath sent me, since thou didst ask Him for me.”
And Abba Pawli said unto him, “I beseech thee to tell me all thine error”; and Satan said
unto him, “Ask me what thou willest.” And Abba Pawli said unto him, “How dost thou
find the means of entering into man against God’s Will?” And Satan said unto him, “We
have no power to enter into man as long as he walketh in the path of God, nor into him that
invoketh the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, nor into those who
receive the Body and Blood of Christ in holiness”; and then Satan told him all his error.
And when Abba Pawli looked about so that he might remove himself from Satan, there
was, as it were, a flash of fire; and Abba Pawli was terrified, but an angel of God appeared
and strengthened him. And on that day a stroke of God descended and destroyed those
who were in the bathhouse, and all that were left [alive] were one man and five women.
And Abba Pawli said unto them, “Why do ye do this?” And they said unto him, “Our
fathers commanded us to go into the bath house, and to enjoy ourselves one day each
month with our women. We shut the doors, and extinguish the lamps, and lie with the
woman on whom our hand happeneth to fall.” And Abba Pawli said unto them, “Doth
anyone of you know his daughter or his sister?” And they said unto him, “Certainly not,
one doeth like the irrational beast.” And Abba Pawli taught them the Faith of Christ, and
baptized them in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and administered
to them the Holy Mysteries. And he went into his cell, and finished his fight, and departed
to his God at a good old age. Salutation to Pawli, who made Satan to reveal to him the
crafty and deceitful means, which he used in seducing the children of men.
233

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also the holy and honorable Ignatius, Archbishop of Antioch, became a
martyr. This saint was the disciple of the blessed John the evangelist, and he followed him
in preaching, and he went with him to many cities; and after this, John made him
Archbishop of Antioch, and he preached the doctrine, which maketh alive therein. And he
converted many to the knowledge of God, and he baptized them with Christian baptism,
and he illumined them with knowledge, and revealed unto them the error of those who
worship idols. And the pagans were wroth with him, and they accused him before the
Emperor Trajan the Caesar, a heretic, and they said unto him, “Ignatius destroyeth the
worship of thy gods, and he teacheth the people and bringeth them into the Christian Faith
of Christ.” And straightway Trajan sent and had him brought into his presence, and the
emperor said unto him, “Why hast thou done this, Ignatius? And why hast thou destroyed
the worship of my gods, and hath brought all men to worship Christ?” And Ignatius said
unto him, “If thou wilt allow me, O emperor, I will bring thee also to the worship of Christ,
the God of all men, and I will make thee His friend.” And the emperor said unto him,
“Cease this talk, and offer sacrifice to the gods, and if thou dost not do so I will torture thee
very severely.” And Saint Ignatius said unto him, “O emperor, do whatsoever thou wishest
to me, for I will not worship thine unclean gods, and I am not afraid of thy tortures, neither
by thy fire nor by thy lions, and thou canst not separate me from the love of Christ, the
Living King.” When the emperor heard this he was exceedingly wroth, and he
commanded his soldiers to torture him severely. And they tortured him with divers kinds
of tortures: they put burning coals of fire upon his hands, they pinched him with tongs the
claws of which had been made red-hot in the fire, and they burnt his sides with red-hot
pitch and oil; and after this they sliced all his body into pieces with butchers’ knives made
of iron. When those who were torturing him were weary of inflicting tortures upon him,
they cast him into the prison house until they were able to do with him what they wished;
and he remained in the prison house for many days. And then they remembered him and
brought him out and set him before the emperor, and the emperor said unto him, “O
Ignatius, if thou couldst see the gods thou wouldst be pleased with their beauty.” And the
saint said unto him, “If thou didst believe on Christ I could make thee to raise the dead,
and to heal the sick.” And the emperor said unto him, “There is no worship better than the
worship of the sun.” And the saint said unto him, “How is it good to worship the sun,
which was created, and to forsake the Creator, Whose kingdom shall never end?” And the
emperor said unto him, “What thou sayest is good, but thy transgression is not good, for
thou hast drawn all the people of Syria to the worship of Christ.” And the saint was wroth,
and he said unto the emperor, “Because I have drawn men away from the worship of idols,
and have brought them into the worship of Christ, the Creator of the heavens and the earth,
Who existed before the world, thou art wroth with me, and dost command me to worship
thy gods and thine unclean idols! I will not accept thy words, and I will not sacrifice to
Satans, but I will worship my God, Who is indeed God, the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit.” And straightway the emperor was wroth with him, and he commanded his
soldiers to make two famished lions to attack him so that nothing whatsoever of his body
might remain. And when Saint Ignatius saw the lions drawing towards him, he cried out
with a loud voice and said unto the people, “Hear my voice, O ye men of the city of Rome,
who are gathered together here, know ye that I do not suffer this torture for the sake of
pride and arrogant boasting, but I suffer it patiently for the sake of Jesus Christ, my Lord
God. And behold, my soul desireth that these lions shall chew me up like grain, for my
soul desireth to depart to my Lord Jesus Christ.” And when the emperor heard this he
marveled, and was frightened, and said, “How great is the patient endurance of these
234

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Christians under these tortures! What pagan is there who would have been able to endure
such punishment as this for the sake of the gods?” And when all the lions had come to the
saint they looked at him, and they stood still being frightened [of him]. Then one of them
smote with his paw the head of the saint and clawed him, and straightway the saint
delivered up his soul into the hand of Christ his God, with joy, and his petition was
fulfilled. And those lions were not able to touch his body, for it was laid up in the city of
Rome until the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; and they took it to a grave which
was outside the city, with praise and singing. Thus he finished nobly his martyrdom for
the Name of our Lord Christ, and the story of his fight hath been written so that it may be
profitable to him that readeth it. And those who shall remember his name, and shall
celebrate a festival in his honor, in any place, he shall make intercession when they are
suffering tribulation, for he is the enemy of the life of this world. Salutation to Ignatius.
And on this day also died the Holy Father Fulgosius, Archbishop of the city of Antioch.
This holy man married a wife and begot a daughter, and then his wife died and he assumed
the garb of the monk; and because of his virtues, and his goodness, and his pleasing
manners, and his asceticism, and his gentleness God chose him to be Archbishop of the
city of Antioch. And having been appointed he tended the flock of Christ carefully and
well, and he protected it against the Arian wolves, and the followers of Macedonius, and
the Sabellian heretics. He lived the life of an angel in his archiepiscopal office, and he did
not possess a change of apparel, and he had no money. And he finished his fight and
pleased God, and died in peace. And Saint John of the Golden Mouth (i.e. Chrysostom)
praised him in his [Book of] Praisings and Discourses, and made manifest therein his
virtues and his righteousness. Salutation to Fulgosius, the devotee of God.
And on this day also died ... in one day, even as the angel told them. [Wanting in the
Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 25
(January 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died John Kama (John, the Black). This holy man was from the city of Sabra,
of the country of Mansis (Mansurah) in the north of Egypt, and his parents were Godfearing believers; and they had no other son, ad they wished to rejoice in him in this world.
And they married him to a certain maiden against his will, and when he entered the bridal
bed-chamber he stood up as one who prayed frequently, and he drew nigh to the maiden
and said unto her, “O my sister, thou knowest that this world is a fleeting thing, and all the
lust thereof; wilt thou that we agree together to preserve our bodies in purity?” And she
answered and said unto him, “God is my witness that I have never for a moment thought of
desire in my heart. I do not love marriage. May parents forced me to marry thee against
my will. And now, behold, God hath fulfilled my petition.” And they agreed together to
preserve their virginity unsullied, and they lived together many days and they slept
together, but kept their virginity undefiled. And it came to pass that when they lay down
235

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
together the angel of God descended like a bird, and covered them over with his wings.
And because of their exceedingly great righteousness God made a vine to grow in their
house, which no man had planted, and it grew and mounted up and overshadowed their
heads, and their children (sic). And it was a sign of their virginity and of their holiness, for
this their action was above the nature of the children of men--two young people sleeping
together and the desire of the flesh never rising in their thoughts! Who can go into the fire
without burning himself? They would not have done this unless the help of God had
protected them. And when their parents saw that they had lived together for many days,
and had begotten no children, they thought that they had had no children because they were
too young. And after this John Kama said unto his wife, “O my sister, I want to go to the
desert of Scete and become a monk, but I will do nothing without thy consent.” And she
answered and said unto him, “Do what thou wishest, and may God cause thee to be right,
so far as I am concerned.” When she had said this John took her and placed her in a house
of virgin nuns, and she became abbess, and she performed signs and wonders and pleased
God. And when the saint went out to depart and to labor in the desert of Scete, a man with
a shining face appeared unto him and asked him concerning his going forth. And Saint
John Kama said unto him, “If God be willing I wish to become a monk.” And the man
with a shining face advised him and said unto him, “Go to the cell of Saint Abba Darudi of
the monastery of Abba Macarius, and live with the elder Abba Darudi, who will make thee
a monk and teach thee the path of the ascetic life.” And the shining man walked with John
Kama, and comforted him until he came to the house of Abba Darudi; and when he entered
the house Abba Darudi received him into it, and arrayed him in the garb of the monk, and
Abba John learned from him the Monastic Rule and the way of righteousness until Abba
Darudi died. When Abba Darudi died the angel of God commanded Abba John Kama to
go to the west, to the city of Saint Abba John, the Short, and to build a habitation for
himself there. And he departed thither, and three hundred brethren gathered together to
him, and he arrayed them in the garb of the monk, and they built a church and a tower (or,
fortress), and he taught them to pray and to sing hymns and psalms, and the Liturgy, and
the Praises of our Lady Mary. One night when they were standing in prayer at the time of
midnight, at the praising of our Lady Mary, the apostolic Saint Athanasius appeared unto
him, and revealed unto him spiritual mysteries; and from that day they have mentioned the
name of Saint Athanasius at the end of the prayer of the Three Children. Once our Lady
Mary appeared unto John Kama, and said unto him, “This place shall be my house for
ever. And I will be with thy sons as I have been with thee, and my name shall be given to
this monastery”; and the church was dedicated in the name of our Lady Mary, the Godbearer. Now there were certain monasteries in Upper Egypt the monks of which wished to
be under the shadow of Saint Abba John Kama, and they sent a message to him asking him
to come to them, so that he might strengthen them in his Rule and Ordinances. And Abba
John called one of his disciples whose name was Sinoda, and he said unto him, “Stand
over the brethren until I return”; and that holy brother whose name was Sinoda stood on
his feet, and he slumbered not, nor lay on the ground, until Saint Abba John Kama returned
from Upper Egypt; and he found him standing on his feet, which had broken out in ulcers
wherefrom the worms were crawling. And Abba John Kama said unto him, “O my son
Sinoda, why hast thou done this thing? I commanded thee to stand over the brethren in my
place, and to inspect their works and their obedience.” And Sinoda bowed down at his feet
and said unto him, “Forgive me, O my father, I have not done anything good.” Then the
days drew nigh when God wished to give Abba John Kama rest from the toil of this
fleeting world, and the saint wished to depart to his everlasting habitation, which changeth
236

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
not; and he became a little sick and delivered up his soul into the hand of God. Salutation
to Abba John Kama. Salutation to Abba Darudi.
And on this day also died the Maccabees in the kingdom of the Midianites and Moabites.
There was a king whose name was Sirusadin who was devoted to evil, and he boasted
himself in the multitude of his horses, and the might of the soldiers who were under his
authority. And he had many gods whom he worshipped and served, fifty of whom were in
the form of men and twenty in the form of women; and he used to sacrifice to them
morning and evening, and compel [other] men to sacrifice to them. And there was a man
of the tribe of Benjamin whose name was “Maccabeus,” and he had three good, strong
sons; one of them used to choke bears, and kill them like chickens, and one of them used to
kill a bear with a single blow. And their names were “Abya” and “Sila” and “Pantos.”
And they possessed beauty of their hearts, for they worshipped God, and feared not death.
And the king said unto them, “Ye are heretics; why do ye not offer sacrifice to my gods
and worship them?” And they answered him with one voice, and said unto him, “We will
neither offer sacrifice to thy gods, now worship them, but we will worship the Lord God,
Who is thy Creator, and Who made thee, and made thee to reign over all His work so that
thou mightest see His people in integrity and righteousness. When He shall say unto thee,
‘Leave this world,’ wilt not thou have to leave it? And will He not give thy glory to
another, because thou hast made thyself blind to the duties of governing, which He hath
committed to thee? For suddenly death shall come upon thee. And at the Resurrection
there shall be judgment, and the deeds of men and of kings shall be enquired into. There is
nothing, which shall give them honor, for at the punishment and the judgment riches and
poverty shall be alike. The Judge is just, and the punishment is prepared, and the Books
shall be opened, and the deeds of men shall be made manifest, and there shall be nothing,
which shall remain, concealed and unrevealed at the resurrection of the dead. Even the
earth shall give back what hath been committed to its care, and what hath been laid upon it,
even as a woman when her time for bringing forth hath arrived cannot shut her womb
when that which is in her belly is about to go forth. Can any man compel the clouds to
gather up water when their Lord hath commanded them to drop down rain? And they will
shut up the souls of sinners in houses of darkness, the darkness where there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth. And the souls of the righteous they will take into the houses of light,
wherein there is pleasure and never-ending joy. And at the resurrection of the dead [souls]
will be gathered from the four winds, and they shall be brought by water, and by the dew,
and by the sun, and by the heat, and by the dust of the earth, and by the breath of the
winds; and God will bring from His habitation the Spirit. And when He summoneth them
with one word they will all be gathered together, and the resurrection will take place. And
the Living God, the Spirit of Life, will give the space of seven hands to one grain,
according to His Will, and it shall shoot out its roots into the earth, and sprout and bust into
leaf above ground. See that it be not dead, and unable to live at all.” And when the king
heard this he commanded [his soldiers] to cast them into a red-hot oven, and they did as
the king commanded; and these blessed and holy men entered it and delivered up their
souls into the hand of God, their Lord. And the angels met them with joy and gladness,
and they took them into the bosoms of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Garden of
Delight. And the king also commanded the soldiers to cast their bodies into the sea, and
they did so, but the sea would not swallow them, because the Spirit of God was with them.
And he also commanded them to cast their bodies to the wild beasts, and they did so, but
neither the wild beasts nor the birds would touch them; and the eagles and other birds
hovered over them and protected the bodies for fourteen days. And their bodies sparkled
237

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
like the foot (i.e. rays) of the sun, and like a tabernacle of light. Salutation to the five (sic)
Maccabees.
And on this day also are commemorated Nicolaus, the governor, and his believing wife,
and Daniel, the Less, the monk and spiritual fighter.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 26
(January 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Anastasia became a martyr. This spiritual fighter was from the city of
Rome; her father was a worshipper of idols, and her mother was a Christian, who as soon
as the child was born, had her baptized secretly with Christian baptism and without her
father’s knowledge; for had he known it would have been impossible to baptize her. And
her mother reared her piously, and each day and each night she suckled her on Christian
doctrine, and at length she brought her into the True Faith, and no one was able to change
her belief. When she had grown up and had reached the age for marriage her father gave
her in marriage to a man who was an infidel like himself, and she hated him exceedingly,
and had no wish whatsoever to consort with him. And she pretended to be ill, and she was
always putting forward the pretexts which women are wont to use when they want to avoid
union with their husbands. She would frequently dress herself in soiled and wretched
apparel, wishing by these means to make him to hate the sight of her, so that he might not
have the desire to have union with her, and that, perhaps, he might separate from her
altogether. And she prayed and entreated our Lord Jesus Christ very often to remove her
from him quickly. And when her husband would leave his house to go to his work, she
used to go out likewise, and pass into the streets and visit the believers of the True Faith
who were shut up in prison, and minister unto them, and give them what they needed.
When her husband knew this he made her prisoner in his house, and he shut the door upon
her that she could not go out, and she prayed to God often with tears, and sorrow, and
groans, to release her from her husband’s hand; and God heard her petition, and received
her groaning, and destroyed her husband straightway; and when her husband died she
rejoiced in his death exceedingly. Then she rose up forthwith and gave all her goods to the
poor and the needy, and the prisoners, and the confessors, and those who fought the
spiritual fight. And the governor of the city heard the report of her, and sent a messenger
to her to bring her to him, and he brought her; and the governor questioned her concerning
her Faith, and she confessed before him that she was a Christian. And the governor spoke
many words unto her; and made her many promises in order to make her abandon her good
counsel, but she refused [so to do]. When she would not obey him, the governor tortured
her very severely, and when he was weary of torturing her he ordered his soldiers to sink
her in the sea, and they drowned her; but straightway God raised her up out of the sea alive
and uninjured. When the governor heard that she was alive, he commanded the soldiers to
lay her down on the ground between four pegs, and to tie her to the pegs, and to beat her
with stripes, which caused agonizing pains, and they did to her even as he commanded; but
no harm whatsoever came to her. Then he commanded them to cast her into a pit of fire,
238

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
which was prepared for her, and she delivered up her soul into the hand of God, and
entered the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Anastasia who rejected idols.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 27
(January 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Absadi the bishop became a martyr. When the Emperor Diocletian heard
the report of the great Bishops Abba ‘Absadi and Abba Hellanicus, of Upper Egypt, and
that they were confirming the Christians in the True Faith of our Lord Christ, and were
destroying the worship of idols, he sent messengers and had them brought to him, and he
tortured them very severely. And Saint Abba ‘Absadi asked the imperial messenger to
wait for him one day. Then he prepared the Eucharist, and administered to the people the
Holy Mysteries, and he commanded them to hold fast to the True Faith, and he embraced
them and went forth from them, and delivered his soul into the hand of God. And the
messenger took him to Arianus, the governor of the city of Antinoe. And when the
messenger saw the face of Abba ‘Absadi, he marveled at his appearance and his dignity,
and he was sorry [for him], and said unto him, “Thou art a man of dignity; take pity on
thyself and hearken to the voice of the emperor.” And the saint answered and said unto
him, “I will not hearken to the command of the emperor, the infidel, and I will not
exchange the kingdom of heaven for life in this transitory world”; and there were many
words between them, but Saint ‘Absadi would not turn from his good counsel. And then
the governor commanded the soldiers to torture him on the wheel, [and they did so]; and
they cast him into a red-hot oven, and also into the furnace which heated the baths; and
Saint Abba ‘Absadi endured all these tortures patiently, and God raised him up uninjured.
Then the governor commanded them to cut off his head with the sword. And when the
saint heard this he rejoiced with a great joy, and he put on his priestly vestments, and he
stretched out his neck and they cut off his glorious head, and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to ‘Absadi and Hellanicus, Bishops
of Upper Egypt.
Salutation to the endurance of Abba Bag’u, who laid a ban upon water or seventy years.
Salutation to Philip the virgin, who by fasting and the spiritual fight reduced himself to
skin and bone.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

239

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TAHISAS 28
(January 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the festival of the Nativity of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus
Christ in the flesh, of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary. Now our God by the operation of
His Wisdom commanded that a decree should go forth from Augustus Caesar, the emperor,
that all the people should be numbered, and their names written down; and because of this
Joseph went up from Nazareth, and the Virgin Mary was with him, to Jerusalem so that his
name and her name might be written down. And he was of the tribe of Judah, and of the
house of David, for the home of David was in Bethlehem, even as the Holy Gospel saith.
And when they had arrived there, the day of her bringing forth came, and she brought forth
her first-born Son, and she wrapped Him up in His swathing, and laid Him in a manger,
because there was no room in their abode. And there were shepherds in that place keeping
vigil, and tending their flocks. And the angel of God stood by them, and the glory of God
rose upon them, and they feared with a great fear. And the angel said unto them, “Fear not,
for behold I tell you tidings of great joy which shall be for you and all nations. Behold,
there is born unto you this day a Savior, Who is Christ God the Blessed, in the city of
David. And the sign of this is that ye shall find the Child tied up in His swathing and lying
in a manger.” And forthwith there came with that angel multitudes of the hosts of heaven,
and they praised God, saying, “Glory (or praise) to God in the heavens, and peace on the
earth to the children of men [is] His pleasure.” And the angels passed way from them and
went up into the heavens. And the shepherds said among themselves, “Let us depart and
go to Bethlehem, so that we may know this thing which God hath made known unto us.”
And they departed quickly, and they found Mary and Joseph, and the Child lying in a
manger, and the place where he was shone with light. When they saw they knew that the
words, which [the angel] had spoken unto them concerning the Child were true, and they
worshipped the Child, and returned to their places praising God and giving thanks unto
Him. And they related to everyone what they had seen and heard, according to what had
been told to them. Glory to our Lord God and Redeemer Jesus Christ forever and ever.
Amen.
And on this day also one hundred and fifty men and four and twenty women became
martyrs. These people came from the city of Antinoe and they were infidels. When the
governor of Antinoe tortured Saint Paul the Syrian, the martyr, these people watched Saint
Paul the Syrian whilst he was being martyred. And straightway the governor commanded
the soldiers to make iron nails red-hot in the fire, and to gouge out the eyes of Saint Paul
therewith; and when they had done this they gouged out his eyes, and cast him into the
prison house. And the people came to him to see him again, and his eyes could see, for our
Lord Christ had healed them, and he appeared as one who had not suffered any pain
whatsoever, even as they themselves could testify. And when those men and women saw
this miracle, they marveled exceedingly, and they knew that their idols could not perform
such a miracle as this, and that God Who had created them, the Creator of creation, was the
God Who had healed the two eyes of Paul. And they all cried out with one voice, saying,
“We are Christians, and we openly confess the God of Saint Paul.” Then they drew nigh
unto Saint Paul and bowed down at his feet, and besought him to pray on their behalf. And
he lifted them up, and blessed them, and said unto them, “God shall accept your trust, and
240

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
shall number you among the martyrs”; and they went to the governor and confessed our
Lord Christ before him. And he commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads with the
sword, and they cut them off, and these men and women received crowns of martyrdom in
the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to the festival whereon Christ was born.
Salutation to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
Salutation to the men and women who were of the company of Paul the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 29
(January 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And on this day is celebrated the greatest of all festivals, the honorable, and great, and holy
festival of the Birth of our Lord Christ, of the holy Virgin Mary. Now our fathers, the
doctors of the Church, are at one in their opinion that the festival of the Holy Nativity
should be celebrated on two days, for the Nativity took place in the last part of the night of
the twenty-eighth day, and in the first part of the night of the twenty-ninth day. When
Paguemen (i.e. the intercalary month) hath six [days], in that year the festival of the
Nativity shall be on the eight and twentieth day; but if Paguemen hath five [days] the
festival of the Nativity shall be on the nine and twentieth day. And the [doctors] have
ordained and commanded that the festival of the Nativity shall be celebrated two days, for
it is the chief of the holy festivals. And the Holy Gospel saith, “And our Lord Jesus was
born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod. And behold there came wise men from
the country of the East, and they came into Jerusalem, saying, ‘Where is He who is born
King of the Jews? For we have seen His star, and have come to worship Him’” (Matthew
ii, 1,2). Now these wise men were of the family of Balaam, and they were diviners, and
astrologers, and they watched the stars, and held converse with them. And it was written
in their books and in the books of Balaam, that Christ, the King of the Jews, was to be
born, for he saith, “A star shall rise from Jacob and a king from Israel” (Numbers xxiv,
17). And God in the operation of His wisdom made these diviners to understand, and he
made those who were astrologers to believe in Him. And He showed them this star, and
when they saw it they rejoiced, for its appearance was different in very many respects from
that of the other stars. Now its appearance was this: That star had the form of a virgin
embracing a child in her bosom, and it traveled from left to right, and it traveled by day,
and disappeared by night. When the wise men traveled, the star traveled; and when they
stood still it stood still. And it was visible to them in one place, and was hidden from them
in another. When they came into Jerusalem it became hidden, and when it was hidden
from them they were exceedingly sorry, and did not know what to do. And then they came
into Jerusalem and asked for Him that had been born. And the number of those diviners
was three thousand, and their kings were three, and each of them had one thousand and
seventy horses. And when Herod heard about the diviners who had come to Jerusalem on
account of the King Who had been born, he was dismayed and was afraid for his kingdom,
for he heard from the Jews about him, that the Messiah would be born in the flesh. And he
241

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
gathered together all the chief priests, and the scribes of the people, and he said unto them,
“Where is the Messiah to be born?” And they said unto him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for
even thus is it written in the prophet: ‘And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Ephrata, thou
shalt not be for ever the least important and smallest of the principalities of Judah, for in
thee shall be born and go forth a king and a governor who shall supervise My people
Israel’” (Matthew ii, 6). Then Herod summoned unto him the diviners by themselves in
secret, and he enquired carefully of them the day when the star appeared unto them. And
he sent them to Bethlehem, saying, “When ye have departed enquire carefully about the
Child and where He is born, and when ye have found Him come back to me, and tell me so
that I may come and worship Him.” Now these words came from him with deceit, for
when the wise men had found Him, he determined to kill Him. And when the wise men
heard these words from the king, they departed, and that star which they had seen in the
East guided them until it brought them to the cave, and it stood over the cave where the
Child was; and when they saw Him they rejoiced with great joy. And by the Will of God
Joseph and Mary and the Child our Lord Jesus, went out that day to the cave, and at length
the diviners found them, for our Lord Christ was reared only at Nazareth. And it was two
years after He was born when the diviners came to Him, and when they entered the cave
they found the Child with Mary His mother, and they fell down and worshipped Him, and
they embraced Him, and they opened their treasures and brought and gave Him the gold
which was His tribute, for He was a king, and incense because He was God, and myrrh,
which was a symbol of His life-giving death. And [the angel] appeared unto them again
and told them in a dream not to go back to Herod, but to depart by another road and
journey to their own country. And they departed and became preachers and announcers of
the appearance of God in the flesh. Concerning this day Isaiah the prophet prophesied,
saying, “Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and she shall call his name
Emmanuel which is, being interpreted, God with us” (Isaiah vii, 14). And concerning this
virgin the prophet Ezekiel prophesied, saying, “I saw the door of the East. And God said
unto me: This shall be a means of exit. None shall enter through it, and none besides the
Lord God of Israel shall go out there from” (Ezekiel x, 19). And concerning this virgin
Daniel the prophet saith, “I saw as it were the Son of man, and a cloud came until it
reached the Ancient of Days. And it drew nigh unto Him and ascribed to Him dominion,
and sovereignty, and honor, and it made all the people and all he nations worship Him, and
His dominion was an everlasting dominion, and there was no end to His kingdom” (Daniel
vii). And Isaiah the prophet also saith, “God appeared unto me from Zion, having covered
Himself with a covering of flesh like unto myself, and He said unto me, Behold the flesh
which I will take from the seed of David, the son of Jesse.” And Isaiah the prophet also
saith, “Behold, I will assuredly make a new heaven and a new earth, and I will dwell in
them with those I love, and they shall rejoice for ever.” And also, “God will make a rod
from the root of Jesse to bud, and He will put wisdom, and knowledge, and power therein,
and he shall do justice to the poor, and he shall smite the earth with the word of his mouth,
and he shall slay the perverse with the spirit of his lips.” And Isaiah the prophet also saith,
“I will set my son to be a sign for the nations, and he shall rule over them, and they shall
believe on Him and put their trust in Him, and He shall be for rest and glory, and the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of God.” And Isaiah also saith, “For unto us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given. His dominion shall be upon His swathing, and His name shall be
called, Great, Counselor, Almighty God, Governor, King of Peace, Everlasting Father who
shall come.” And Jeremiah the prophet saith, “Thus saith the Lord: In those days great
light shall rise up for David, and he shall set judgment and integrity in the earth. And God
242

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
shall deliver those who believe on Him, from Judah and Israel.” And Elisa the prophet
saith, “God shall come down from heaven, and shall walk about in the market-places of the
children of Israel, and He shall teach the people righteousness, and all nations shall be in
submission unto Him, except the nation of the alien sons of Abraham.” And Nehemiah
prophesied, saying, “God shall come in my own appearance, and His raiment shall be as is
my raiment.” And Joel the prophet prophesied, saying, “I see the virgin daughter of the
tribe of Judah and of the seed of David become a seat for God, and she shall burn like fire.
And I asked the Cherubim concerning her, and I said unto him, ‘Who is this [virgin]?’
And he said unto me, ‘This is the virgin, the seat of God, chosen from among the sons of
Adam, and by her He shall redeem the abominable nations, and she shall be a helper and a
support of him that shall believe on her.’” And David saith in the Psalms, “The Great God
said unto me: Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Ask Me, I will give Thee
the nations for an inheritance, and Thy rule shall be to the ends of the earth. Thou shalt
rule them with a rod of iron, and like the vessel of the potter Thou shalt smash them. And
now, O kings, get ye understanding, and be admonished all ye who judge the earth. Serve
ye God with fear, and rejoice in Him with trembling; strengthen wisdom so that God may
not be wroth, and that ye may not perish from the way of righteousness. Blessed be all
those who put their trust in Him” (Psalm 2). And the prophet also saith in the 110th Psalm,
“I begot Thee in the womb before the Morning Star. God hath sworn, and He will not
repent. Thou art a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedek” (Psalm 110:3&4).
As he revealed unto Abraham a ram in the thicket, and as water poured out of the rock in
the desert, and as the dry rod of Aaron sprouted and blossomed, and as the ass of Balaam
spoke, and as water poured out from the jawbone of an ass into the hands of Samson the
giant, and water and honey from the bones of a lion, and as the fire burned in the bush
before Moses, and the bush was not consumed, even so did our Lady, the holy Virgin
Mary, bring froth our Lord Jesus Christ. And the fire of His Godhead did not consume the
Virgin Mary. Salutation to Thy Birth, O Lamp of the darkness.
And on this day also was born Joshua, the judge, of the house of Ephraim, who became the
salvation of the children of Israel against the attacks of their enemies, just as the Birth of
our Lord became the salvation of Adam and his children. Now formerly the name of
Joshua was “Hose’a” but when God delivered the children of Israel from Amalek by his
help, he was called “Iyasus” that is to say, “Savior” (or “Redeemer”). After the death of
Moses God chose him to be judge over Israel, and he delivered them from slaughter by
alien nations, and made them to inherit their land; then he died in peace and inherited the
kingdom of heaven.
“The kings of Saba and Arabia shall bring gifts with entreaty, and the kings of the Islands
and of Tarshish shall bring in presents” (Psalm 72:10). Hath come, hath come David, the
king, was said of old by the little virgin who brought him forth. [Omitted in the Bodleian
MS.]
Salutation to Thy Birth, O consuming Fire.
Salutation to your blood which was shed, O ye martyrs of ‘Akmim. [Omitted in the
Bodleian MS.]
Salutation to the blessed Kuoril, master of three camels [Kuoril the camel man, of the city
of Samanud,] and Abba Gize.
243

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also are commemorated Jacob (James) and Piles (Pilses), and Theodore,
the martyrs.
And on this day also died ‘Akaryos (Abgar), King of Roha (Edessa). The kingdom of this
saint was in the country of Syria, which is called “Saranin,” and in the city of Roha
(Edessa), and he was a worshipper of idols, and a paralytic, and [although] he had given
[much] money to the physicians they would not heal him. And when he heard of the
works of our Lord, and the miracles which He performed, and how He healed the sick, and
cast out devils, and opened the eyes of the blind, and raised the dead, he sent a letter to
Him, saying, “Peace be unto Thee, O God, Who hast appeared in Jerusalem, in the flesh of
men. And peace be unto Thy Father Who hast sent Thee down without Thy being
separated from Him. And peace be unto the Holy Spirit, Who hath whispered in my mind
that Thou art His Messiah, and His equal. Peace be unto Thee, O Thou Who wast begotten
in virginity, without the seed of man. And peace be unto those who have believed on
Thee. I believe on Thee, and I have turned from the worship of idols to the worship of
Thee. Come to me that Thou mayest be King over me, and make my city Thy home (?),
and heal my sickness, and cleanse my impurity. What matter the Jews to Thee? They spit
upon Thy Name, and they hurt Thee; they are a nation of men of perverted counsel. If in
times of old they did not believe on Thee when Thou didst bring them out of Egypt, by
working miracles, and didst feed them with manna for forty years (?), and they murmured
against Thee so much that Thou didst deliver them over to destruction, how much less will
they believe on Thee when they see Thee clothed in the flesh of earth, which hungereth
and thirsteth? Dost Thou imagine that their evil disposition will show itself differently
because Thou art learned in hidden things?” And these and such like things did the King
of Roha (Edessa) send to Him in writing. And when the messengers came to our Lord, He
knew what was in their hearts, and He told them what was in the letter before they spoke to
Him. And then He took a piece of white cloth and wiped His face thereon, and the exact
form and features of His face remained impressed on that cloth, and He sent it with
Thaddeus, His disciple, [to the King of Roha (Edessa),] saying, “Take this picture of My
Person, and it shall fulfill for thee all thy wants, and it shall heal thee of thy sickness, and
shall bless thy city, and direct thy kingdom rightly. I have tested this picture in fire and in
water to see if it would change, [but it did not].” And when the messengers came to
‘Akaryos (Abgar) they gave him the picture, and he put it in the fire and in water, and
neither harmed it. And the city of Roha (Edessa) believed in it, and in its divine authority,
and it worked miracles innumerable. And the king was healed of his sickness and died in
peace that day. Salutation to ‘Akaryos (Abgar), to whom our Lord sent an indestructible
portrait of Himself.
And on this day also died Kuoril, the camel man. This holy man was from the city of
Samnud, and he devoted himself to fasting and to prayers, and God gave him the
knowledge of mysteries, and of things that were hidden. And he had three camels, which
he worked according to his needs, and he used to load them with what he required from the
flax fields, which he possessed. And he had a certain man, who was one of the men of
Faragun, and who was a chief priest of the shrine of our Lady Mary of that city, and his
father had held the [same] office before him; and this church possessed much money which
had been given thereto by kings and governors. And he used to have charge of the
treasury, which was hidden, and the bishop and he, who was under him, that is to say, this
chief priest, knew the amount of treasure therein; and then, suddenly, without uttering a
word to his son, he died. When the bishop heard of his death he came to the church and
244

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
demanded the money from his son, who said, “I do not know where the treasury is, and my
father, whom the hand of death hath snatched sway suddenly, hath never told me.” When
the bishop heard this he was wroth and he wished to torture him, and the man said to the
bishop, “Wait until I have looked for the place where the treasure is, and if I do not find it
do with me what thou wilt”; and to this the bishop agreed, and fixed a time. And the
young man went into his house and told his wife all the trouble. And she said unto him,
“Put thy trust in God, and go to the monks, the fathers of Dabra Abba Makara, and ask
them and their neighbors for they will tell thee.” And when he had arrived there he asked
the monks with tears to make themselves masters of [his] sorrow; and not one of them
could tell him anything. Then a certain solitary made a sign to him, and said unto him,
“Go to Samnud, and enquire for Kuoril an owner of camels, and tarry with him, and he
will tell thee [where it is].” And when he had come into the city of Samnud, and enquired
for Kuoril, the people told him [where he was]; and when he arrived there he found him in
his house and his three camels were with him. As soon as Kuoril saw him, he knew by the
Spirit everything, and what he wanted, and then he brought him into his dwelling and
offered him food. And the young man said unto him, “O my father, I cannot eat until I
have finished my errand”; and Kuoril said unto him, “Thine errand shall be fulfilled.” And
after supper each man went to sleep in his abode. And at midnight Kuoril the camel man
saw a vision of that man standing by his camels, and when he bowed the man bowed with
him, and when he prayed the man prayed with him. And on the morrow he took his
camels into the desert to load them with the flax, which he needed, and that man [of the
dream] went with him to help him. When they arrived in the fields Kuoril took one camel
to load him with flax, and that man took the second camel to load him, but he put a load on
the camel’s back which was beyond his capacity to carry, and overloaded him very much
indeed; and when the animal wanted to raise his load he was unable to move. And that
man took a stick to beat him, but the camel cried out in human speech, saying, “O my
father Kuoril, do not let this man ill-treat me; he hath loaded me beyond what is right for
me.” And Kuoril came and lightened the weight of the camel’s load, and he said unto that
man, “O my son, why didst thou load him with a weight heavier than he could carry?
Wouldst not thou be sorry if one laid a heavy load upon thee, and a labor which thou
couldst not perform?” And then when they came into their abode he asked him about his
sorrow so that he might tell him and reveal to him the place of the treasure; and having
made him to swear that he would not repeat his words to anyone else, he said unto him,
“There is at the east end of the church a little box, and therein is the treasure.” And when
the young man went into his house, he told his wife, and they went together to that place
and found there a treasure the like whereof in quantity doth not exist in the treasuries of
kings; and he told the bishop, who took charge of it. Salutation to the blessed Kuoril.
And on this day also the men of Akmim became martyrs. They were gathered together in
the church on the festival of the Nativity, which is to be praised! And they were
performing the service of the consecration of the Offering, and they saw our Lord sitting
upon the Tabot (tabernacle) administering the Holy Mysteries to the people. And whilst
they were enjoying this happiness Arianus came and attacked them, and he entered the
church and seized the two prefects of the city whose names were Behwafa and Wenin, and
cut off their heads with the sword. After that he slew the deacons, and the sub-deacons,
and those who sang (i.e. the choir), and the steward of the church, and he left not alive
neither woman nor child; and he slew so many that the blood ran out of the door of the
church and along the road for a distance of twenty cubits. And Abba Venudius, the bishop,
and Dioscurus, and Saclabius and his brethren who were with them, Arianus took with him
245

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
bound in fetters. And behold the memorial of their martyrdom is written in the section for
the First Day of the month of Ter. Salutation to your blood, O ye martyrs of Akmim,
which was shed mercilessly.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TAHISAS 30
(January 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And on this day is celebrated the greatest of all festivals, the honorable, and great, and holy
festival of the Birth of our Lord Christ, of the holy Virgin Mary. Now our fathers, the
doctors of the Church, are at one in their opinion that the festival of the Holy Nativity
should be celebrated on two days, for the Nativity took place in the last part of the night of
the twenty-eighth day, and in the first part of the night of the twenty-ninth day. When
Paguemen (i.e. the intercalary month) hath six [days], in that year the festival of the
Nativity shall be on the eight and twentieth day; but if Paguemen hath five [days] the
festival of the Nativity shall be on the nine and twentieth day. And the [doctors] have
ordained and commanded that the festival of the Nativity shall be celebrated two days, for
it is the chief of the holy festivals. And the Holy Gospel saith, “And our Lord Jesus was
born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod. And behold there came wise men from
the country of the East, and they came into Jerusalem, saying, ‘Where is He who is born
King of the Jews? For we have seen His star, and have come to worship Him’” (Matthew
ii, 1,2). Now these wise men were of the family of Balaam, and they were diviners, and
astrologers, and they watched the stars, and held converse with them. And it was written
in their books and in the books of Balaam, that Christ, the King of the Jews, was to be
born, for he saith, “A star shall rise from Jacob and a king from Israel” (Numbers xxiv,
17). And God in the operation of His wisdom made these diviners to understand, and he
made those who were astrologers to believe in Him. And He showed them this star, and
when they saw it they rejoiced, for its appearance was different in very many respects from
that of the other stars. Now its appearance was this: That star had the form of a virgin
embracing a child in her bosom, and it traveled from left to right, and it traveled by day,
and disappeared by night. When the wise men traveled, the star traveled; and when they
stood still it stood still. And it was visible to them in one place, and was hidden from them
in another. When they came into Jerusalem it became hidden, and when it was hidden
from them they were exceedingly sorry, and did not know what to do. And then they came
into Jerusalem and asked for Him that had been born. And the number of those diviners
was three thousand, and their kings were three, and each of them had one thousand and
seventy horses. And when Herod heard about the diviners who had come to Jerusalem on
account of the King Who had been born, he was dismayed and was afraid for his kingdom,
for he heard from the Jews about him, that the Messiah would be born in the flesh. And he
gathered together all the chief priests, and the scribes of the people, and he said unto them,
“Where is the Messiah to be born?” And they said unto him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for
even thus is it written in the prophet: ‘And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Ephrata, thou
shalt not be for ever the least important and smallest of the principalities of Judah, for in
thee shall be born and go forth a king and a governor who shall supervise My people
246

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Israel’” (Matthew ii, 6). Then Herod summoned unto him the diviners by themselves in
secret, and he enquired carefully of them the day when the star appeared unto them. And
he sent them to Bethlehem, saying, “When ye have departed enquire carefully about the
Child and where He is born, and when ye have found Him come back to me, and tell me so
that I may come and worship Him.” Now these words came from him with deceit, for
when the wise men had found Him, he determined to kill Him. And when the wise men
heard these words from the king, they departed, and that star which they had seen in the
East guided them until it brought them to the cave, and it stood over the cave where the
Child was; and when they saw Him they rejoiced with great joy. And by the Will of God
Joseph and Mary and the Child our Lord Jesus, went out that day to the cave, and at length
the diviners found them, for our Lord Christ was reared only at Nazareth. And it was two
years after He was born when the diviners came to Him, and when they entered the cave
they found the Child with Mary His mother, and they fell down and worshipped Him, and
they embraced Him, and they opened their treasures and brought and gave Him the gold
which was His tribute, for He was a king, and incense because He was God, and myrrh,
which was a symbol of His life-giving death. And [the angel] appeared unto them again
and told them in a dream not to go back to Herod, but to depart by another road and
journey to their own country. And they departed and became preachers and announcers of
the appearance of God in the flesh. Concerning this day Isaiah the prophet prophesied,
saying, “Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and she shall call his name
Emmanuel which is, being interpreted, God with us” (Isaiah vii, 14). And concerning this
virgin the prophet Ezekiel prophesied, saying, “I saw the door of the East. And God said
unto me: This shall be a means of exit. None shall enter through it, and none besides the
Lord God of Israel shall go out there from” (Ezekiel x, 19). And concerning this virgin
Daniel the prophet saith, “I saw as it were the Son of man, and a cloud came until it
reached the Ancient of Days. And it drew nigh unto Him and ascribed to Him dominion,
and sovereignty, and honor, and it made all the people and all he nations worship Him, and
His dominion was an everlasting dominion, and there was no end to His kingdom” (Daniel
vii). And Isaiah the prophet also saith, “God appeared unto me from Zion, having covered
Himself with a covering of flesh like unto myself, and He said unto me, Behold the flesh
which I will take from the seed of David, the son of Jesse.” And Isaiah the prophet also
saith, “Behold, I will assuredly make a new heaven and a new earth, and I will dwell in
them with those I love, and they shall rejoice for ever.” And also, “God will make a rod
from the root of Jesse to bud, and He will put wisdom, and knowledge, and power therein,
and he shall do justice to the poor, and he shall smite the earth with the word of his mouth,
and he shall slay the perverse with the spirit of his lips.” And Isaiah the prophet also saith,
“I will set my son to be a sign for the nations, and he shall rule over them, and they shall
believe on Him and put their trust in Him, and He shall be for rest and glory, and the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of God.” And Isaiah also saith, “For unto us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given. His dominion shall be upon His swathing, and His name shall be
called, Great, Counselor, Almighty God, Governor, King of Peace, Everlasting Father who
shall come.” And Jeremiah the prophet saith, “Thus saith the Lord: In those days great
light shall rise up for David, and he shall set judgment and integrity in the earth. And God
shall deliver those who believe on Him, from Judah and Israel.” And Elisa the prophet
saith, “God shall come down from heaven, and shall walk about in the market-places of the
children of Israel, and He shall teach the people righteousness, and all nations shall be in
submission unto Him, except the nation of the alien sons of Abraham.” And Nehemiah
prophesied, saying, “God shall come in my own appearance, and His raiment shall be as is
247

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
my raiment.” And Joel the prophet prophesied, saying, “I see the virgin daughter of the
tribe of Judah and of the seed of David become a seat for God, and she shall burn like fire.
And I asked the Cherubim concerning her, and I said unto him, ‘Who is this [virgin]?’
And he said unto me, ‘This is the virgin, the seat of God, chosen from among the sons of
Adam, and by her He shall redeem the abominable nations, and she shall be a helper and a
support of him that shall believe on her.’” And David saith in the Psalms, “The Great God
said unto me: Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Ask Me, I will give Thee
the nations for an inheritance, and Thy rule shall be to the ends of the earth. Thou shalt
rule them with a rod of iron, and like the vessel of the potter Thou shalt smash them. And
now, O kings, get ye understanding, and be admonished all ye who judge the earth. Serve
ye God with fear, and rejoice in Him with trembling; strengthen wisdom so that God may
not be wroth, and that ye may not perish from the way of righteousness. Blessed be all
those who put their trust in Him” (Psalm 2). And the prophet also saith in the 110th Psalm,
“I begot Thee in the womb before the Morning Star. God hath sworn, and He will not
repent. Thou art a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedek” (Psalm 110:3&4).
As he revealed unto Abraham a ram in the thicket, and as water poured out of the rock in
the desert, and as the dry rod of Aaron sprouted and blossomed, and as the ass of Balaam
spoke, and as water poured out from the jawbone of an ass into the hands of Samson the
giant, and water and honey from the bones of a lion, and as the fire burned in the bush
before Moses, and the bush was not consumed, even so did our Lady, the holy Virgin
Mary, bring froth our Lord Jesus Christ. And the fire of His Godhead did not consume the
Virgin Mary. Salutation to Thy Birth, O Lamp of the darkness.
And on this day also was born Joshua, the judge, of the house of Ephraim, who became the
salvation of the children of Israel against the attacks of their enemies, just as the Birth of
our Lord became the salvation of Adam and his children. Now formerly the name of
Joshua was “Hose’a” but when God delivered the children of Israel from Amalek by his
help, he was called “Iyasus” that is to say, “Savior” (or “Redeemer”). After the death of
Moses God chose him to be judge over Israel, and he delivered them from slaughter by
alien nations, and made them to inherit their land; then he died in peace and inherited the
kingdom of heaven.
“The kings of Saba and Arabia shall bring gifts with entreaty, and the kings of the Islands
and of Tarshish shall bring in presents” (Psalm 72:10). Hath come, hath come David, the
king, was said of old by the little virgin who brought him forth. [Omitted in the Bodleian
MS.]
Salutation to Thy Birth, O consuming Fire.
Salutation to your blood which was shed, O ye martyrs of ‘Akmim. [Omitted in the
Bodleian MS.]
Salutation to the blessed Kuoril, master of three camels [Kuoril the camel man, of the city
of Samanud,] and Abba Gize.
And on this day also are commemorated Jacob (James) and Piles (Pilses), and Theodore,
the martyrs.
And on this day also died ‘Akaryos (Abgar), King of Roha (Edessa). The kingdom of this
saint was in the country of Syria, which is called “Saranin,” and in the city of Roha
248

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
(Edessa), and he was a worshipper of idols, and a paralytic, and [although] he had given
[much] money to the physicians they would not heal him. And when he heard of the
works of our Lord, and the miracles which He performed, and how He healed the sick, and
cast out devils, and opened the eyes of the blind, and raised the dead, he sent a letter to
Him, saying, “Peace be unto Thee, O God, Who hast appeared in Jerusalem, in the flesh of
men. And peace be unto Thy Father Who hast sent Thee down without Thy being
separated from Him. And peace be unto the Holy Spirit, Who hath whispered in my mind
that Thou art His Messiah, and His equal. Peace be unto Thee, O Thou Who wast begotten
in virginity, without the seed of man. And peace be unto those who have believed on
Thee. I believe on Thee, and I have turned from the worship of idols to the worship of
Thee. Come to me that Thou mayest be King over me, and make my city Thy home (?),
and heal my sickness, and cleanse my impurity. What matter the Jews to Thee? They spit
upon Thy Name, and they hurt Thee; they are a nation of men of perverted counsel. If in
times of old they did not believe on Thee when Thou didst bring them out of Egypt, by
working miracles, and didst feed them with manna for forty years (?), and they murmured
against Thee so much that Thou didst deliver them over to destruction, how much less will
they believe on Thee when they see Thee clothed in the flesh of earth, which hungereth
and thirsteth? Dost Thou imagine that their evil disposition will show itself differently
because Thou art learned in hidden things?” And these and such like things did the King
of Roha (Edessa) send to Him in writing. And when the messengers came to our Lord, He
knew what was in their hearts, and He told them what was in the letter before they spoke to
Him. And then He took a piece of white cloth and wiped His face thereon, and the exact
form and features of His face remained impressed on that cloth, and He sent it with
Thaddeus, His disciple, [to the King of Roha (Edessa),] saying, “Take this picture of My
Person, and it shall fulfill for thee all thy wants, and it shall heal thee of thy sickness, and
shall bless thy city, and direct thy kingdom rightly. I have tested this picture in fire and in
water to see if it would change, [but it did not].” And when the messengers came to
‘Akaryos (Abgar) they gave him the picture, and he put it in the fire and in water, and
neither harmed it. And the city of Roha (Edessa) believed in it, and in its divine authority,
and it worked miracles innumerable. And the king was healed of his sickness and died in
peace that day. Salutation to ‘Akaryos (Abgar), to whom our Lord sent an indestructible
portrait of Himself.
And on this day also died Kuoril, the camel man. This holy man was from the city of
Samnud, and he devoted himself to fasting and to prayers, and God gave him the
knowledge of mysteries, and of things that were hidden. And he had three camels, which
he worked according to his needs, and he used to load them with what he required from the
flax fields, which he possessed. And he had a certain man, who was one of the men of
Faragun, and who was a chief priest of the shrine of our Lady Mary of that city, and his
father had held the [same] office before him; and this church possessed much money which
had been given thereto by kings and governors. And he used to have charge of the
treasury, which was hidden, and the bishop and he, who was under him, that is to say, this
chief priest, knew the amount of treasure therein; and then, suddenly, without uttering a
word to his son, he died. When the bishop heard of his death he came to the church and
demanded the money from his son, who said, “I do not know where the treasury is, and my
father, whom the hand of death hath snatched sway suddenly, hath never told me.” When
the bishop heard this he was wroth and he wished to torture him, and the man said to the
bishop, “Wait until I have looked for the place where the treasure is, and if I do not find it
do with me what thou wilt”; and to this the bishop agreed, and fixed a time. And the
249

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
young man went into his house and told his wife all the trouble. And she said unto him,
“Put thy trust in God, and go to the monks, the fathers of Dabra Abba Makara, and ask
them and their neighbors for they will tell thee.” And when he had arrived there he asked
the monks with tears to make themselves masters of [his] sorrow; and not one of them
could tell him anything. Then a certain solitary made a sign to him, and said unto him,
“Go to Samnud, and enquire for Kuoril an owner of camels, and tarry with him, and he
will tell thee [where it is].” And when he had come into the city of Samnud, and enquired
for Kuoril, the people told him [where he was]; and when he arrived there he found him in
his house and his three camels were with him. As soon as Kuoril saw him, he knew by the
Spirit everything, and what he wanted, and then he brought him into his dwelling and
offered him food. And the young man said unto him, “O my father, I cannot eat until I
have finished my errand”; and Kuoril said unto him, “Thine errand shall be fulfilled.” And
after supper each man went to sleep in his abode. And at midnight Kuoril the camel man
saw a vision of that man standing by his camels, and when he bowed the man bowed with
him, and when he prayed the man prayed with him. And on the morrow he took his
camels into the desert to load them with the flax, which he needed, and that man [of the
dream] went with him to help him. When they arrived in the fields Kuoril took one camel
to load him with flax, and that man took the second camel to load him, but he put a load on
the camel’s back which was beyond his capacity to carry, and overloaded him very much
indeed; and when the animal wanted to raise his load he was unable to move. And that
man took a stick to beat him, but the camel cried out in human speech, saying, “O my
father Kuoril, do not let this man ill-treat me; he hath loaded me beyond what is right for
me.” And Kuoril came and lightened the weight of the camel’s load, and he said unto that
man, “O my son, why didst thou load him with a weight heavier than he could carry?
Wouldst not thou be sorry if one laid a heavy load upon thee, and a labor which thou
couldst not perform?” And then when they came into their abode he asked him about his
sorrow so that he might tell him and reveal to him the place of the treasure; and having
made him to swear that he would not repeat his words to anyone else, he said unto him,
“There is at the east end of the church a little box, and therein is the treasure.” And when
the young man went into his house, he told his wife, and they went together to that place
and found there a treasure the like whereof in quantity doth not exist in the treasuries of
kings; and he told the bishop, who took charge of it. Salutation to the blessed Kuoril.
And on this day also the men of Akmim became martyrs. They were gathered together in
the church on the festival of the Nativity, which is to be praised! And they were
performing the service of the consecration of the Offering, and they saw our Lord sitting
upon the Tabot (tabernacle) administering the Holy Mysteries to the people. And whilst
they were enjoying this happiness Arianus came and attacked them, and he entered the
church and seized the two prefects of the city whose names were Behwafa and Wenin, and
cut off their heads with the sword. After that he slew the deacons, and the sub-deacons,
and those who sang (i.e. the choir), and the steward of the church, and he left not alive
neither woman nor child; and he slew so many that the blood ran out of the door of the
church and along the road for a distance of twenty cubits. And Abba Venudius, the bishop,
and Dioscurus, and Saclabius and his brethren who were with them, Arianus took with him
bound in fetters. And behold the memorial of their martyrdom is written in the section for
the First Day of the month of Ter. Salutation to your blood, O ye martyrs of Akmim,
which was shed mercilessly.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
250

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE FIFTH MONTH
TIR 01
(January 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Stephen, the Apostle, Archdeacon and Protomartyr, became a martyr. This
holy man, as the Book of the Acts of the Apostles testifieth, was full of grace, and of the
Holy Spirit, and of power, and he used to perform signs and miracles among the people.
And the Jews were envious of him, and they seized him and brought him into their
synagogue, and they said, “We found him blaspheming God and Moses, and saying that
Jesus shall change the Law of Moses, and shall overthrow this holy place.” And those who
were sitting round in the Sanhedrin looked at the face of the blessed Stephen, and saw that
it was like unto the face of an angel of God. And they said unto him, “Is this thing true
which is said concerning thee?” And the saint answered and said unto them in a loud
voice, “Hear ye, O our fathers and brethren. The God of praise appeared unto our father
Abraham in the country between the rivers (Mesopotamia), before he had left Harran, and
He said unto him, Get thee out from thy country and from thy kindred, and come into the
land which I will show thee; and he went forth from Harran as God commanded.” And
again God commanded him to speak, and then Stephen talked to them about the birth of
Isaac, and concerning Jacob and his sons, how they sold Joseph, and how Joseph knew his
brethren when he was chief. And Saint Stephen talked with them until [he came to] the
building of the sanctuary. And then he lifted up his voice and said unto them, “O ye stiffnecked men, ye dense of heart, at all time do ye resist the Holy Spirit, even as did your
fathers who persecuted the prophets who prophesied, and who preached concerning Christ,
Whom ye killed, and Who hath risen from the dead.” And when they heard this they
gnashed their teeth upon him. And Saint Stephen being full of faith, and of the Holy
Spirit, looked up to heaven, and he saw the glory of god, and Jesus Christ at the right hand
of God His Father, and he said unto them, “Behold, I see heaven open, and Jesus standing
on the right hand of God His Father.” And when they heard [this] they shut their ears, and
took him that they might stone him with stones, and they deposited their apparel with Saul,
that is to say Paul. And they took Stephen outside the city, and stoned him, and he prayed
to God on their behalf, and he knelt down on his knees and said, “Receive my soul unto
Thyself, O God.” And he said, “Let not this sin be reckoned unto them”; and he was like
unto his Lord. And when he had said this he died, and certain believing men came and
carried away the body of the saint, and they lamented for him with a great lamentation, and
buried him. Salutation to Stephen.
And on this day also Saint Lavendius (Leontius) became a martyr. This saint lived in the
days of the Emperor Maximianus, the infidel, in the country of Syria. When the Emperor
heard about him, and knew that he was a fighter of the spiritual fight, and that he
worshipped God, he sent and had him brought before him. And he offered him very much
money, and tried to persuade him to forsake the worship of God, and to serve his idols.
And Saint Lavendius (Leontius) laughed at him and spurned his gifts, and his money, and
his honors, and despised his punishments, and cursed his unclean gods. And straightway
the Emperor was wroth exceedingly, and he commanded his soldiers to hang him up on the
wheel, and to torture him severely; and they did to him as the emperor commanded, but
251

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
God brought him out sound and uninjured. Then the emperor commanded them to beat
him with clubs, and to boil oil and fat in a large cauldron, and to cast the saint into it; and
they did this to him. And the saint endured all these tortures, for our Lord Christ make him
strong, and enabled him to endure, and He raised him up whole and uninjured. When the
emperor was tired of torturing him, he commanded them to cut off his head with the
sword, and thus he received a crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And
many signs and wonders were made manifest through his body, and the fame of him was
heard throughout Syria; and they built churches and monasteries in his honor. In one of his
monasteries Saint Severus, Archbishop of the city of Antioch, was baptized when he was a
child. Salutation to Lavendius (Leontius).
And on this day also died Saint Macarius, the sixty-first Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. When Abba Michael, the Archbishop, his predecessor, died, the bishops, and
chief priests, and elders of Egypt, gathered together, and they all went up to the desert of
Scete, and they took up their abode in the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius, and they
enquired carefully of the desert monks, and the righteous men who dwelt in cells and
caves, and asked them who was fit for the honorable office of archbishop; and one of the
righteous men told them about this saint. And the priest Macarius, who dwelt in the
monastery of Saint Abba Macarius, said, “He is better than all others for this office”; and
they searched for him, and seized him against his will, and as they bound him, he cried out
“I am a sinner and am not fit for this work”; but they did not hearken to his words, and
they made him archbishop against his will. And he appointed bishops and priests in every
district of Egypt, and he restored many churches, and in his days all Christians lived in
peace and safety, for twenty-seven years and thirty-one days, and he was well pleasing to
God, and died in peace. Salutation to Macarius.
And on this day the saints of Akmim became martyrs, and their history is as follows:
There was a certain man of the men of Akmim who was a judge, and he was rich in gold
and silver, and his name was El-Sidmalyos, and he begot two sons whose names were
Dioscurus and Saklabius (Aesculapius), and they were reared in the fear of God, with
fasting and prayer. And when their father died they wished to adopt the monastic life; and
the angel of God appeared unto them and [commanded] them to go to the monastery of
Abba Moses, the desert monk; and having gone to him they put on the garb of the monk,
and they fought the spiritual fight strenuously, and performed signs and wonders. And
after a few [days] Dioscurus was made a deacon [and] priest, and Saklabius a deacon, and
then it happened that Diocletian denied the God of heaven, and commanded Arianus, the
governor of Ensena (Esneh) to slay [all] the Christians who would not sacrifice to his gods.
And Arianus arrived in Akmim and he seized Peter, the bishop, Abba Bunudyas, and he
bound him, and came into his city. And Michael, the angel of God, appeared unto
Dioscurus and Saklabius, and told them that they were to receive the crown of martyrdom
in the kingdom of the heavens, and on the twenty-eighth day of the month of Tahsas they
and twenty-four monks went to Arianus. And when they arrived in the city of ‘Akmim
they found the Christians, together with their wives and children, in the church of Christ
our Redeemer, ready to celebrate the festival of the Glorious Birth and to die for His
Name; and Abba Benudyas (sic) the bishop came with them. And on the following
morning Abba Benudyas read the Liturgy, and when he came to the passage wherein is
said “Holy,” the angels cried out, saying, “Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven
and earth are full of Thy glory.” And the saints saw our Redeemer sitting upon the Tabot
(tabernacle) and the angels standing round Him raising the Offering, and He placed the
252

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Offering in the hand of the priest that he might present it to those assembled there. When
Arianus heard [this] he was filled with great wrath, and he came into the church, and seized
the two elders of the city whose names were Behwafa and Wenin, and cut off their heads
with the sword. And after that he killed the deacons, and the sub deacons, and the singers,
and the steward of the church, and he left neither woman nor child alive; and at length their
blood ran out of the door of the church, and flowed down the road for a distance of twenty
cubits. Then [the officer] took Abba Bunudyas (sic) the bishop, and Dioscurus and
Saklabius, and the brethren who were with them, and carried them before Arianus, who
persuaded them to worship idols. And when they refused to do so, he commanded soldiers
to beat Dioscurus and Saklabius until their bones were shattered, [and they did so], but the
angel of God appeared unto the saints, and healed them. And Karyon and Philemon, the
chief officers of the guard of Arianus, and the forty soldiers who were with them, saw this
miracle, and they believed on Jesus Christ. And the governor commanded his soldiers to
cast them into a red-hot oven, and they finished their martyrdom on the thirtieth day of the
month of Tahsas. And several of those who were gathered together there cast themselves
into the oven, without any man compelling them to do so, and they finished their
martyrdom. And on the first day of the month Ter, whilst Dioscurus and Saklabius were
shut up in prison, Michael the Archangel appeared unto them and made them strong to
finish their martyrdom. And on the following day Arianus held converse with them
concerning their worshipping idols, and when they refused to do so, he commanded the
soldiers to gouge out the eyes of Dioscurus, and the saint took up his eyes and put them
back in their sockets, and they were as they had been before [they were gouged out]. And
Lucius, an officer, and his company of soldiers believed in Christ, and the governor cast
them into a pit, and they completed their martyrdom. And then Arianus commanded the
soldiers to kill the saints, and whilst they were praying the Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto
them and gave them the covenant that whosoever invoked their names, and commemorated
them, and wrote a history of their strife should be numbered with the company of the
righteous. Then the soldiers came and cut off the head of Saint Dioscurus with the sword,
and Saklabius they cut in halves, and the four and twenty monks they split in twain, from
their heads to their feet, and they were crowned on the first day of the month Ter. And
Samuel, who was a kinsman of theirs, swathed their bodies for burial, and he buried them
in the church, which was consecrated in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost. And the number of the martyrs who were slain is eight thousand one hundred and
forty. Salutation to Dioscurus and Saklabius.
And on this day also became martyrs, excepting those who died the day before, whom
Diocletian killed, sixty priests, one hundred and thirty deacons, fifty-three singers, eighty
stewards (i.e. vergers) of churches, forty-two judges, one hundred and fifty sub deacons,
eight thousand four hundred and ninety members of the laity, and their elders Ledianus
(Lydianus), and Tadres (Theodore), and Paul.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

253

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TIR 02
(January 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Abel, the righteous man, whose blood was shed by violence; and he was
the first-born of the dead, whom Cain his brother slew. And the cause of this was the fact
that Adam transgressed the command of God, and ate of the tree, although he was
commanded not to eat of the tree, and death obtained dominion over him, and over his
sons, and he became a slave of sin, and Satan was given permission to lead him astray
forever. Then when he went out from the Garden, and descended into the low- [lying]
land, he continued for one hundred years to weep and to lament, because he was stripped
of the glory of his honor, and was driven out from his inheritance. When his lamentation
was ended, he knew his wife Eve, and she conceived by him and she bore him Cain and
Elyud his sister. And then he knew Eve again, and she bore him Abel and ‘Aklima his
sister. And when the children were become young men Adam said unto Eve, “Behold thy
children have grown up, let Cain marry ‘Aklima, who was born with Abel, and let Abel
marry ‘Elyud, who was born with Cain.” And Cain said unto Eve his mother, “It is right
that I should take my sister, who was born with me, and that Abel should take his sister,
who was born with him”; now this [he wanted] because ‘Elyud who was born with Cain
was more beautiful than ‘Aklima the sister of Abel, and she was like Eve her mother. And
when Adam heard this, it was exceedingly grievous unto him, and he said, “This is against
the Law, and it is not right for thee to do this thing, and to take to wife thy sister who was
born with thee.” At that moment envy (or jealousy) entered into the heart of Cain, and he
wanted to kill Abel. Then Adam said unto Cain and Abel, “Get ye forth and offer up an
offering to God, and whichever He pleases let it be to Him.” When they had offered their
offerings God looked upon the altar of Abel, and accepted his offering, and He rejected the
offering of Cain. Then the jealousy and anger of Cain were increased, and Satan came
upon him, seeking a pretext for killing him. And when he had gone down into the valley
Satan visited Cain, and he said unto him, “Why art thou sorrowful?” And Cain said unto
him, “Because my father hath commanded me to give my beautiful sister to my brother
Abel.” And Satan said unto him, “Hear my voice, O my friend, and listen to my
admonition. Rise up and follow thy brother, and thou wilt find him drinking water; smite
him on his head with a stone, and when he dieth thou canst marry both thy sisters.” And
the advice of Satan was good in Cain’s sight, and he burned with the lust for fornication,
for he was the son of perdition. And then he took up a stone and smote the head of Abel,
who died by the hand of his brother through jealousy of a woman. This was the beginning
of sorrow, and the cause of death in the world. And concerning this God said unto Adam
and Eve when they were in the Garden, “Ye shall not eat of this tree, for in the day wherein
ye eat thereof ye shall surely die” (Gen. ii, 17); and these words referred to Abel before [he
was born]. And God said unto Cain, “Where is thy brother Abel?” And Cain said unto
Him, “Am I my brother Abel’s keeper?” And God said unto him, “The blood of thy
brother hath come to Me. Cursed shall the earth be because she hath opened her mouth to
drink the blood of thy brother; and do thou tremble, and be terrified all the days of thy
life.” And this curse was exceedingly heavy upon Cain, and at length his seed was
destroyed from off the face of the earth by the waters of the Flood, because of Abel. And
Enoch saith, “I heard the blood of Abel crying out, and accusing his brother.” And our
parents, the children of Adam, before the waters of the Flood, used to swear by the blood
254

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
of Abel, and our Lord said unto the scribes and Pharisees, “Which of the prophets did not
your fathers kill? Therefore there cometh upon you the blood of all the righteous which
hath been poured out upon the ground from the blood of Abel the Just to the blood of
Zachariah the priest, the son of Berachiah, whom they slew in the midst of the sanctuary”
(Matthew xxiii, 35). And Paul saith, “The sacrifice of Abel was better than [that of] Cain,
by reason of the faith which he brought to God, and it became a witness concerning him
that he was a righteous man, and the sacrifice which he offered to God also testified
concerning him; and [although] he is dead it yet speaketh.” And he saith also, “Jesus, the
lamp and guide of the new covenant, and the sprinkling of the blood of the prophet, which
speaketh better than that of Abel” (Hebrews xi, 4; xii, 24). And then, when Adam missed
Abel, his son, he said unto Cain, “Where is thy brother?” And Cain answered him angrily,
saying, “How should I know where by brother is?” And Adam ran into the valley and
found Abel, and he took Abel’s head in his arms, and said unto him, “Who killed thee?”
and Abel said, “Cain killed me.” And Adam and his wife wept for Abel for four weeks of
years. And as soon as Abel was dead angels came to Adam and said unto him, “Good
tidings for thee, O father of the world! Thy son Abel reposeth in peace among the trees of
thy Garden, and his soul hath ascended to God as a sacrifice, which hath been accepted.
As thou wast the first to [bring in] death, so he is the first to enter into the holy place.”
When Adam heard this he was comforted and he buried Abel in the Cave of Treasures.
Salutation to Abel the accepted sacrifice.
And on this day also Hellanicus, the bishop [of Weshim], became a martyr. When the
Emperor Diocletian, the infidel, heard the report that Saint Hellanicus was teaching the
people to reject his gods, he sent envoys to seize him, and to torture him severely. And
when the blessed Hellanicus heard of the arrival of the envoys of the emperor, he gathered
together the people who were in his city Weshim, and he consecrated the Offering, and
administered unto them the Holy Mysteries, the Body and Blood of Christ, and then he
said unto them, “After this time ye will never again see my face.” And they all wept with a
bitter weeping, and they were unable to hold him back against his will. Then he went out
and delivered himself up to the envoys of the emperor, and they took him and gave him to
the governor of Antinoe to torture. And the governor tortured him severely, and God gave
him strength and enabled him to endure the torture; and then the governor took him with
him to the city of Edku and there also he tortured him severely. And when he was tired of
torturing him he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and to cut
through his body to the shoulders; and they cut through his head down to the shoulders;
and the governor took him with him to carry him to the city of Tukh. And as they were
traveling in the boat, the saint, knowing that his death was near, commanded one of the
sailors, who was a believer, saying, “When we arrive at the port (or quay) and I am dead,
cast out my body on a hill”; and having said this he died. And they arrived in port, and
straightway the sailor took the body of the saint and cast it out on a hill. And immediately
certain believers, who had been commanded to do so by the angel of God, came and took
his holy body, and swathed it for burial, and hid it among them until the end of the days of
persecution. And they built a church, and laid his body therein, and great signs and
miracles took place [therein] through it. Salutation to Hellanicus whose shoulders were cut
through.
And on this day also died the holy father Theonas, the sixteenth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This saint was learned, and wise, and strong in the True Faith, and good in
every action of his life; and all men loved him because of his learning and wisdom. And
255

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
he built in the city of Alexandria the church of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary; [until that
time] the Christians and the believers were only able to pray and to receive the Eucharist in
cells (or caves) secretly because of their fear of the infidels. And this saint persuaded the
people until they let him build beautiful churches, and he converted many of them, and
baptized them with Christian baptism. At the end of the [last] year of his office he
baptized the blessed Peter, who became archbishop after him; in the fifth year of his office
he made him a reader, in the twelfth year of his office he made him a deacon, and in the
sixteenth year of his office he made him a priest. In the days of this saint there appeared in
the city of Alexandria the infidel Sabelus, who believed and said that Father, Son and Holy
Spirit are one Person; and this father anathematized him and brought his evil faith to
naught. And in his days Cosmas, and Damianus, and their mother suffered martyrdom.
And this father finished a good life, and pleased God, and having sat for eight and twenty
years he died in peace. Salutation to Theonas, who baptized Peter.
And on this day was consecrated the church of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary, in the
monastery of Abba Sinoda. Salutation to the consecration of thy church, O Mary.
And on this day also nine thousand seven hundred souls became martyrs with Philotheus,
and Sabela the daughter of Hercules, the interpreter of dreams.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 03
(January 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day were slain the innocent, the holy and righteous children and martyrs, [who
were in number] eighteen thousand. [In the Bodleian MS. 144,000.] When Herod, the
wicked, had waited for the diviners to return to him, and they did not do so, he became
exceedingly angry, and he sent his soldiers and they killed the children in Bethlehem, and
in Judea, and in all the region round about, whose days were two years and less, according
to the time when he enquired of the diviners. The Holy Gospel saith that when the diviners
departed the angel of God appeared unto Joseph in a dream, saying, “Rise up, take the
Child and His mother and depart to the land of Egypt, and remain there until I tell thee to
return, for behold, Herod is seeking for the Child to kill Him.” And Joseph rose up and
took the Child and His mother by night, and departed to the land of Egypt, in order that
might be fulfilled the words of the prophet, saying, “Out of Egypt have I called My Son”
(Matthew ii, 13; Hosea xi, I). And Herod, the accursed, was wroth, and he wished in his
mind to kill the children, thinking that our Lord Christ might be one of them, and that he
would kill Him. And our Lord Christ, Who performed every human act, the committal of
sin alone excepted, fled from the face of Herod, in the operation of His wisdom, and if
Herod had found Him and killed Him, according to what was meet for the might of His
Godhead He could not have died, or men might have thought that His Incarnation was an
inferior thing. Therefore our Lord fled to the land of Egypt so that prophecy might be
fulfilled, and that He might teach us also to flee from evil, and might destroy the idols of
the country of Egypt. And how was Herod able to kill these very many children? He
256

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
invented pretexts, and he sent messengers into all the cities, saying, “An Imperial Edict
hath reached me from Caesar, who hath commanded to be counted all the little children
whose days are two years and less, so that he may give unto them money and apparel and
they may belong to his army.” And because of this many children were gathered together
with their mothers, and Herod sent out ten hundred soldiers to them and they murdered
them on the hills in one day. And then was fulfilled the prophecy of the prophet who saith,
“A voice is heard in Rama, weeping and lamentation. Rachael weepeth for her children,
and refuseth to be comforted, because her children are wanting” (Jeremiah xxxi, 15;
Matthew ii, 18). Now Bethlehem is named after Rachael. And Saint John the evangelist,
‘Abukalamsis, saith that he saw the souls of these holy children, and that they cried out,
saying, “How long shall we remain unavenged for the violence done unto us? And Saint
John saith, “I saw a vision, and behold there was given unto each one of them white
apparel, and one said unto them, ‘Rest now until your brethren the martyrs who are in the
world shall finish their martyrdom.’” And he saith also, “The praise wherewith the Four
Beasts and the priests of heaven praise [God] none knoweth except these eighteen
thousand little children who have not defiled their bodies with lust; and they shall dwell
with God always. Blessed are they and blessed are the wombs that bare them.” Salutation
to the children whom Herod killed, thinking that he would kill Christ among them.
Salutation to Isaiah who foretold clearly the birth of Christ.
And on this day also died Saint Libanos, who is [called] “Mata’a.” The name of the father
of this holy man was Abraham, and the name of his mother was Negest, and they were rich
in gold and silver. And on the day when they brought a wife to this saint, the angel of
God, Gabriel, called him in the night, and brought him out from the house of his father,
and took him to the monastery of Abba Pachomius, where he became a monk. And then
he departed to the country of Ethiopia, and he dwelt there and fought the spiritual fight for
many days. And he brought water out of a rock, and performed many miracles; and he
died in peace. Salutation to Libanos.
And on this day also is commemorated Abba Ammon, who was always cursing the hair of
women, and who could never abase the instrument of sin. Salutation to Ammon. [Omitted
in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 04
(January 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the departure of John the apostle and evangelist took place. When the lot went
forth that this saint should go to the country of Asia, he was sad and wept, for he knew that
the people there were wicked, and heretics, and stiff-necked; but then he received from our
Lord power and consolation. And he went forth to the country, which was his lot, and with
him was his disciple Prochorus. They embarked in a ship, and intended to go to the city of
the Ephesians, but the ship was wrecked, and each man clung to a plank of wood from the
ship. And the waves of the sea washed Prochorus, his disciple, to an island, but Saint John
257

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
remained among the waves of the sea for forty days and forty nights. At length God
commanded, and the sea carried him to the place where his disciple Prochorus was living,
and he gave thanks to God that they had met again. And they rose up and went into the
city of the Ephesians, but they were unable to preach in the Name of our Lord Christ,
because the men there were wicked, and perverse, and invented pretexts [to harm them].
And John became the furnace-man, and tended the fire of the bath of a woman whose
name was Romna, and Prochorus, his disciple, became a washer of clothes. And the
mistress of the bath afflicted them sorely, and treated them with cruelty, and contumely,
and she used to beat them with sticks and curse them with many, many curses because of
their alien origin and poverty. And she treated them as her slaves, and she wrote labels
whereon their prices for sale were written, and attached them to their persons. And they
remained with her in great wretchedness until the son of the governor of the city came into
the bath to wash. Now there had been in the bathhouse a power of the Satans from the
time when it was built, and this power strangled the son of the governor, and he died
straightway. And when the men of the city gathered together to see the young man who
had died, Saint John came with them, and he stood still and looked on like everyone else.
And when Romna saw him, she cursed him and said, “Hast thou come hither to laugh at
me, and to rejoice thyself over the death of the son of my lord?” And the saint answered
her gently, and said unto her, “Fear not, neither be thou sorrowful”; and he drew nigh unto
the dead man, and made the sign of the Life-giving Cross over him, and he breathed on his
face, and the young man came to life again straightway. And the men of the city cried out,
and came to worship Saint John, and first and foremost among them was his mistress
Romna; and she was weeping, and beseeching him to forgive her all the faults, which she
had committed against him. And when Dioscorides the governor heard that his son was
dead, he was smitten with fear and died; and when they told John this, he made the sign of
the Cross over him, and raised him up from the dead. And he believed on Jesus Christ, and
was baptized with all the men of his house in the Name of the Father and the Son and the
Holy Spirit. And when John reviled the men of the Ephesians because of their worship of
idols, anger seized them, and they stoned him with stones, but the stones came back and
broke their idols. And when they prayed to their god there was a noise, and an earthquake
took place, and three hundred men died; but Saint John prayed and raised them up from the
dead. And the men of the city believed, and were baptized in the Name of the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit. And a certain woman whose son had been seized by an
unclean spirit, came to him, and asked him [to help her], and he took the right hand of the
young man and made the sign of the Cross over him, and he rose up, being freed from the
unclean spirit, and he glorified God. And there was another man who had lain upon a bed
for twelve years, and when he saw John he cried out with a loud voice, saying, “Have
mercy upon me, O apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ.” And when John saw his confidence,
he said unto him, “In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ rise up”; and the man rose up
quickly, and believed on Christ. And when Satan saw all these signs and wonders he was
filled with craftiness and envy, and he took the form of a soldier of the emperor, and came
into the city weeping. And two men who were passing by found him, and they said unto
him, “Why dost thou weep?” And he said unto them, “The emperor hath given me two
men who are magicians, and whose names are John and Prochorus; if ye can seize them for
me I will give you gold.” And straightway the two men seized John and Prochorus, and
wanted to kill them secretly, but when Dioscorides the governor heard of this he delivered
them. And John performed many signs and wonders before them, and all the men of the
city believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, except the priests of the idols, and they did not
258

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
believe and they wanted to kill Saint John. And Satan stirred them up against him to kill
him, but God Who protecteth His chosen ones [saved him]. And Saint John labored hard
and suffered great tribulation until at length he converted them all to the knowledge of
God. And the apostle Saint Paul is a witness concerning them, and concerning the
denseness of heart of the men of Ephesus, and concerning their excessive love for idols.
And with great toil Saint John brought them all into the True Faith, and he set over them a
bishop, and priests, and deacons. And he went forth to all the cities, and traveled through
all the country of Asia, and he converted all the people and brought them into the
knowledge of God. And the blessed John lived ninety years, and grew very old, and he did
not taste death by the sword like all the [other] apostles, but because of his virginity and
purity they are all equally to be praised. And he wrote a Gospel and ‘Abukalamsis (the
Apocalypse) which he saw in the island of Patmo (Patmos), which is full of mysteries.
And he wrote three Letters, which are written in the Book of the Apostle, and it was he
who reclined on the breast of our Lord at the time of the Supper, and he said unto Him,
“My Lord, who is he that shall betray Thee?” And it is he who, at the time of the
Crucifixion of our Redeemer, stood with our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary; and our Lord
said unto the Virgin, “Behold thy son,” and to that disciple He said, “Behold thy mother.”
And he it was of whom Peter spoke when he said, “And this one, what of him?” And our
Lord said unto him, “If it be that I wish him to be [here] until I come, what is that to
thee?” And when the blessed John knew that the time of his departure from this world was
nigh, he summoned the people, and he brake bread, which is the Body and Blood of Christ,
and gave it to them so that they might be strong in the True Faith; and he comforted them
and blessed them. And he then commanded his disciple Prochorus, and some of the other
brethren to take digging tools, and to follow him. And he went a short distance outside the
city of Ephesus, and he commanded them to dig a pit, [and they did so], and he went down
into it and stripped off his apparel, leaving upon him only a tunic and a napkin; and he
lifted up his hands and prayed. And he bade the brethren farewell, and sent them away to
return to the city, and he told the brethren to be strong in the Faith of Christ, and to do
good works, because God would assuredly reward each and every man according to his
work. And he also said unto them, “I am innocent of your blood, for I have never omitted
to tell you of the least of God’s commandments, and there is no ordinance of His which I
have not told you. After this time ye shall never again see my face.” And when he said
this they wept and they kissed his hands and his feet, and left him in the pit and departed;
and the saint knelt down upon his knees and prayed. When the people knew of this their
hearts burned and they were exceedingly sorry, and they all went out, but they could not
find his grave, only his sandals and a garment; and they glorified God Who had made His
disciple to rest in this splendid manner, and they marveled at His work. Salutation to John.
And on this day also are commemorated George, and Matena the Archbishop, and
Theodora the martyr, and Abba Likanos, and Abba Nardos of Dabra Bizan, who killed a
serpent by means of his prayer and did not smite it with a stick, and who stood up in prayer
until his feet decayed.
Salutation to Sabela (Sybil), the interpretress of the dreams of the nine wise men of Rome,
when they made them known unto her. [Wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

259

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TIR 05
(January 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Eusegnius, the martyr. This holy man was a soldier in the days of
the Emperor Constantine, and he served God, and his charities and alms to the poor and the
needy were very many. When the fighters of the Cross-among the stars of heaven
appeared unto Constantine, before he believed in our Lord Christ, he did not know what
the sign portended. And this Saint Eusegnius went to him, and said unto him, “This is the
sign of our Lord Christ”; for there was no one else in Constantine’s army who dared to
mention the Name of Christ except this holy man. And when Constantine had conquered
his enemies by the sign of the Honorable Cross, he became a Christian in truth, and he
lifted up the horn of the Christians and of their Faith. And this soldier lived on after
Constantine, and after the son of Constantine, until the days of Julian the infidel, and at
that time his days were one hundred and ten years. And one day when he was walking
about in the open places of the city of Antioch, he found two men fighting together, and he
wanted to separate them and to make peace between them; now he was an old man who
was held in honor, and he made joy and peace to be between them. And a certain man
went to the emperor and made an accusation against this holy man, and he said unto him,
“Eusegnius hath become a judge and governor of his own free will.” And the emperor had
this saint brought before him; and he rebuked him and said unto him, “Who hath appointed
thee [a judge and governor?” And Saint Eusegnius answered and said unto him], “Why
hast thou forsaken the worship of God, the God of heaven, in Whose hand is thy soul, and
dost bow down to unclean idols, and dost not follow the kings who were before thee? I
was a soldier under Constantine like thee, for twenty years, and also under his son, and
neither of them had the evil habit which thou hast; for thou hast forsaken God and dost
worship unclean idols.” And the emperor was exceedingly worth with him, and he
commanded his soldiers to hang him up, and to apply lighted torches to his sides; and they
did all these things, but the saint endured them all through the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ. And when the emperor was tired of torturing him, he commanded them to cut off
his head with the sword. And when the soldiers arrived to cut off his head, he begged
them to wait whilst he prayed, and when he had finished his prayer they cut off his
honorable head, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens
together with all the saints. Salutation to Eusegnius, who interpreted the mystery of the
Cross to the Emperor Constantine.
And on this day also died Abba Matthew, the eighty-eighth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This father Matthew had parents of the race of Israel, who believed in Christ
and were perfect in good works. The name of his father was Simon and the name of his
mother was Barbara, and God gave them two children, and the name of the elder was Jacob
and the name of the younger was Matthew. And whilst this Abba Matthew was in his
mother’s womb, Abba Peter, Bishop of the city of Abures, met her, and when he saw her
he got off his donkey and kissed her belly, and said unto her, “Blessed art thou, O woman,
and blessed is the fruit of thy belly. Behold there shall go forth from thee a bright star who
shall shine in his preaching like Mark the evangelist.” When Abba Matthew was fifteen
years old his father died, and then he went to Abba ‘Abrem, and Komos of the monastery
of Saint ‘Abufana, and he asked him to array him in the garb of the ascetic life; and the
260

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
abbot said unto him, “Obtain the consent of thy brother, who is older than thou art, and
come back.” When Abba Matthew heard this he went back in sorrow of heart, and on the
way the angel Michael, who was in the form of a monk, met him, and told him that he
should become Archbishop [of Alexandria], and that signs and wonders should be wrought
through him. And having come to his brother, he urged him to let him become a monk,
and when he refused Abba Matthew went to the monastery of Saint Abba ‘Amoni, of the
monastery of Tona, and took refuge in the church. And when the brethren had entreated
his brother, he allowed him [to become a monk], and he went to the monastery of Saint
Abba ‘Abufana, and Abba ‘Abrem made him a monk; and he fought the spiritual fight with
fasting and prayer until he attained the power of the monks. And after a year Abba Peter
went out to Abba ‘Abrem, and he saw Abba Matthew, and his patience and his prudence,
and he asked Abba ‘Abrem to give him to him so that he might be his disciple. And the
bishop took him with him against his will, and he dwelt with him, and he kept vigil all
night long from the time of sunset to sunrise. And when it was eighteen years since he was
born, the bishop took him and made him a priest against his will. And when Satan
observed his vigils he entered into the heart of a certain beautiful woman, who showed him
her person, and solicited him with evil desire; and Abba Matthew seeing her prayed to God
with tears, and even asked for death. Then he went in to the bishop and entreated him to
send him away to his monastery. And when the bishop prevented him he came into the
Episcopal treasury and took a priestly vestment of great price, which belonged to the
bishop, and he slit it into strips, every part of it, with a razor, and then he restored it to its
former place. And on the following day the bishop said unto Abba Matthew, “Bring me
the priestly vestment, for I must officiate at the Eucharist this day”; and when he brought it
to him, it fell down before him like wooden shavings. When the bishop saw this he was
very wroth, and he said, “Who hath done this thing?” And Abba Matthew said, “I did it,
because thou didst prevent me from going away. Is doing this a greater sin than falling
into fornication?” And the bishop sent him away in wrath, and he wrote an order of
excommunication concerning him to the men of the monastery, ordering that he should
perform two hundred prostrations each night and day, and that he should dwell neither in a
cell nor in a house, but in the church at the time of prayer; and Abba Matthew fought this
spiritual fight for two years. When the bishop heard of his patient endurance he sent him
his blessing and removed the ban of excommunication. And then his brother Jacob came
to him, and became a monk, and he fought until he had conquered Satan. And then Abba
Matthew went to the monastery of Abba Anthony, and he dwelt there, fighting
strenuously. And there was there a certain righteous monk whose name was Jacob, and he
saw a vision in which it seemed that a shining angel came unto Abba Matthew, and
embraced him, and gave keys into his hands. And when Abba Jacob awoke he told this to
Abba Matthew who straightway, because he hated empty praise, wandered round the
country from city to city. One day whilst Abba Matthew was officiating in the office of
the Eucharist, he saw our Lord Christ sitting upon the altar, and He lay in the paten like a
little child. And at the time when he broke the Offering, he stood up for a long time with
his hands stretched out and covered with blood, and he continued to weep abundantly, and
he was afraid: and he told this vision to no man. And his teacher saw him and he
marveled at his standing still so long a time, and then he prayed to God to reveal to him
this matter. One day when they were consecrating the Offering as usual, our Lord Jesus
Christ appeared unto them, lying upon the paten in the form of a child, and He was broken
up by the hand of Abba Matthew like bread. And straightway he marveled and said,
“Glory be to Thee, O God, Who hast given unto us sons of men this great gift.” When
261

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Abba Matthew saw this he fetched some iron nails, and drove them into his knee every
Friday until a worm came out there from. Thence he departed to Dabra Kueskuam, and he
dwelt there, and he fought so strenuously that at length when he gazed upwards he could
see our Lord Jesus Christ sitting on the right hand of His Father; and when he looked
downwards he saw Him in the abysses in great glory. When Abba Gabriel the archbishop
died they (i.e. the bishops and priests) appointed Abba Matthew to succeed him as
archbishop against his will, and when he refused they set guards over him, and the
following day all the bishops told him that they had seen a vision and that he was suitable
for the office of archbishop. When Abba Matthew heard this he knew that they would not
let him go, and he took a razor secretly and drew it across his tongue and cut if off. And
that night our Lady Mary came to him, and anointed his tongue with oil, and healed it, and
it became as it was before [he cut it]. And they took him to the city of Alexandria, and
when they were enthroning him on the sixteenth day of the month Nahase (Aug.-Sept.), the
day of the festival of the death of our Lady Mary, a voice was heard from heaven, saying,
“He is worthy, He is worthy, He is worthy.” And they brought the head of Mark the
evangelist that they might lay it in his breast, and the head flew up and kissed his mouth.
And from that time he never sat upon his throne at the time of the Offering, and he never
entered into the house of any man on the Fourth and Sixth Days of the week. And he
prophesied that David (i.e. David I, who was abdicated A.D. 1411, and died 6th Oct. 1413)
would reign as King of Ethiopia though his brother Wedem ‘Asfare (or Germa ‘Asfare,
who reigned till 1382) was reigning. And this father performed many miracles in his days,
and he healed the sick, and raised the dead by the bandlet, which was on his head. And in
his days there was appointed a deputy governor over Mesr (Cairo) who was a wicked man,
and he imposed a tax on the archbishop to which he had never been submitted before; and
when he refused to pay it he beat the archbishop severely, and carried him into his
habitation. That night Abba Matthew entreated our Lady Mary to received his soul from
the torment of this world, and she appeared unto him, and held converse with him, saying,
“Be not sorrowful; after eight days thou shalt rest.” And on the following day Abba
Matthew called the bishops, and priests, and deacons, and all the people, and he told them
about his [coming] death, and he exhorted them about the word of the Faith and blessed
them. And when his sickness increased he took a picture of our Lady Mary, and prayed a
long time, and he kissed the picture and made the sign of the Cross over his face, and he
blessed all the people of the city who believed in Christ, and he died on the First Day of
the week. Salutation to Abba Matthew, the doubly blessed.
And on this day also became martyrs Yarewenyos, and many men and women, and
Negirus (Longinus) of Rome, Alexandra who visited Arsenius, and ‘Awshia.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 06
(January 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day our Lord Christ came into the place of circumcision and fulfilled the Law of
the Torah, even as the Apostle Paul, the perfumed tongue, saith, “Christ received the
262

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
circumcision of His flesh so that He might fulfill the covenant of the fathers”; now many
have imagined that our Lord Christ did not enter the chamber of circumcision, and that He
was not circumcised. If it was as these people thought, would not the Jews have found in
[His uncircumcision] a greater pretext than that which they put forward [for attacking
Him]. And the Holy Gospel saith, “The Jews searched for men who would bear false
witness against Him, and they found them not.” Our Lord Christ fulfilled all the Laws of
Moses, and came into the chamber of circumcision according to the Laws of the Torah.
And for us He hath ordained in its place Christian baptism and the eating of unleavened
bread, and for us He hath ordained in its place His Holy Body and Honorable Blood, and
the abrogation of the Sabbath of the Jews, and for us He hath ordained in its place the First
Day of the week, which is the Day of His Holy Resurrection. And when eight days had
passed since our Lord Christ was born, that is to say when it was the sixth day of the
month of Ter, Mary the pure Virgin said unto Joseph, the just man, “Go and bring me a
skilful circumciser that he may circumcise my Son according to the Law of Moses, and let
us give Him the Name of ‘Jesus’”; and Joseph went and brought a skilful circumciser.
And when the skilful circumciser came he found our Lord Christ in the bosom of the pure
Virgin Mary, and he said unto them, “Hold the Child; I shall be able to circumcise Him
without wounding Him.” And the Child Jesus answered and said unto him, “O skilful
man, I wish to see thy skill, and thy power, and thy work, for how wilt thou circumcise
Me? No blood shall flow from Me in this world, except the blood, which shall flow from
My right side. When one shall pierce Me with a spear in the place of the skull (Golgotha).
When I am on the wood of the Cross, blood shall flow from Me, and shall run down upon
the earth, and it shall be for the salvation of Adam and all the world.” And when the
skilful circumciser heard the words of the Child Jesus, he gathered together his razors and
the iron instruments, and brought them into their house; and he rose up and bowed down at
the feet of the Child Jesus. And straightway his razors melted and became like water, and
he said unto our Lady Mary, “Pure and blessed art thou more than [all other] women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb. This thy Son is not of the seed of Adam, but He is the
Son of God. If He worketh a miracle like this when He is a child, what will happen when
He attaineth the age of manhood? Peradventure He is the Messiah, Who is called Christ,
about Whom the prophets prophesied, saying, ‘Behold a virgin shall conceive, and shall
bear a son, and His name shall be called “Emmanuel,” which is, being interpreted, “God
with us.”’” And our Lord Christ answered and said unto him, “Behold, I am He. Wilt
thou circumcise Me or not? If thou wilt not I will do as My fathers and My grandfathers
did.” And the circumciser said unto Him, “Who was Thy father? Who was Thy
grandfather?” And our Lord Christ said unto him, “They were Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
the fathers of the nation, and they lived before God gave them circumcision”; and the
circumciser said unto Him, “I am not able to talk with Thee, for the Holy Spirit is upon
Thee.” And straightway our Lord Christ lifted up His eyes to heaven, and He said, “O
Father, give me the circumcision which Thou didst give to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in
the earliest times, without the hand of man”; and straightway there appeared in Him
circumcision without the hand of man. And the circumcision of our Lord was an
incomprehensible mystery, even as was His going forth from the belly of Mary without
destroying her virginity, and like His entrance to the Apostles in the Hall of Zion, through
doors which were shut, and like the revelation of His power when in the operation of His
wisdom He wished that not the smallest portion of His Body should be cut off in
circumcision. But it was not so when the blood and water flowed from His side on the
wood of the Cross, so that He might save Adam, and the blood flowed from Him, without
263

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
addition or diminution of its substance, but by His wish so that He might fulfill the Law
which He commanded in olden time. And when the circumciser saw this miracle and
heard His words he marveled exceedingly, and he bowed down thrice at the feet of our
Lord Christ and said unto Him, “Thou art the Son of God and the King of Israel.” And the
circumciser went to his home, and he began to tell the children of Israel what he had seen
and heard. And to our Lord and God and Redeemer Jesus Christ, be honor and worship
with His Good Father and the Holy and Life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Amen.
And on this day also died our father Noah who belonged to the tenth generation from
Adam. This Noah from his earliest years used to contemplate divine mysteries, and to
observe that sin was increasing, and evil growing to the full, and the righteous diminishing,
and that all that was flesh would be destroyed by the waters of the Flood. Because of this
he lamented, and wept, and his face became furrowed, and he preserved his virginity for
five hundred years; and he continued to minister to the body of our father Adam, and to
keep the commands of his God. And then God commanded him to marry a wife and He
told him that He was going to destroy all flesh by the waters of the Flood, and that there
would be left upon this earth none except his own seed. And Noah married a wife whose
name was Haykol, the daughter of Abu Zir, and he went in to her three times, and she
brought forth Shem, Ham and Japhet. And then God said unto him, “Cut down trees on
this holy mountain, and make an ark three hundred cubits long, and five hundred cubits
broad, and thirty cubits high; and make inside it three stages. The first stage shall be for
the beasts, and the second for the birds and for everything that creepeth, and the third stage
for Noah, and his sons and their wives. And he made inside it a cistern for water, and a
store-chamber (or pantry) for their food. And he made a trumpet of Kashyan wood, the
length of which was three cubits, and the breadth one cubit and a half, which was to be
blown three times a day. The first time was at dawn to gather together the workmen for
their work, the second was to assemble the people for their meal, and the third time was to
send the people to bed. When the children of Cain saw Noah making an ark for the water
of the Flood, they mocked at him and began to say, “Behold this old man is mad, or why
would he say that the waters will rise above the tops of the mountains?” Then Noah took
the body of our father Adam and embraced it. And Shem his son took gold, and Ham took
myrrh, and Japhet took incense, and carried them into the ark with the body of our father
Adam. And [Noah] took in with him clean beasts, and animals, and birds, seven of each
kind, and of the unclean beasts, and animals, and birds, two of each kind. And Noah
placed the body of our father Adam facing the east side, and he laid the three offerings
upon his breast; and Noah, and his sons, and his wife, and their wives occupied the west
side. And then God, by His power, shut the door of the ark on Noah, and He commanded
the doors of heaven to be opened, and the storehouses of the deep, and the cataracts of the
winds, and there went forth storm, and mist, and fog, and darkness, and the sun and the
moon and the stars withheld their light, and never before was there such a terrible day.
When the children of Seth, who had committed fornication with the children of Cain, saw
this, they knew that God was angry with them, and that the words which Noah had said
unto them were true. And they all ran to the ark to ask Noah to open its door to them, but
they were unable to ascend the holy mountain, because the stones thereof were like fire;
and the ark was closed and sealed by the power of God. And the angel of God used to
dwell in the ark, and he became a chief to Noah and his sons. And the waters of the Flood
increased and they began to overpower the children of Cain, who were drowned. By the
force of the water the ark was lifted up above the earth, and every being of flesh that lived
264

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
on the earth perished. And the waters rose above the tops of the mountains for a space of
fifteen cubits, and they bore the ark and carried it down to the Garden; and Noah and his
sons and all who were in the ark worshipped in the holy Garden. Then the ark sailed over
the waters, by the force of the winds, and it continued to go onwards for one hundred and
fifty days, and it appeared on Mount Ararat, on the twenty-seventh day of the month of
Tekemt (Oct.-Nov.). And the waters being assuaged on the twenty-seventh day of the
month of Genbot (May-June), on that day, the day on which he went into the ark, Noah
came out from the ark; and this day was the First Day of the week. And God sent His
voice to Noah telling him to take large beasts and to offer up an offering on the altar before
Him. And Noah sent out the animals from inside the ark, and God promised Noah that He
would not destroy the earth again, and as a mark of His promise He set a bow in the
heavens so that all people might see it. And God blessed Noah and his sons, saying,
“Increase and multiply and fill the earth”; and He commanded the earth to bring forth grass
according to its custom, and the beasts and cattle, and the fowl of the heavens, and
everything which moveth [to bring forth young]. And after Noah had gone out from the
ark he planted a vine, and drank of the wine thereof, and he became drunk and stripped
himself naked. When Ham has son saw him he made a mock of him, and told his brethren,
but they turned their faces from him, and covered him with his apparel. And when Noah
recovered himself, and knew what his son Ham had done he cursed him. And after he had
divided the whole earth among his sons, the day of his death arrived, and he died in his
nine hundred and fiftieth year, and was buried on Mount Ararat.
And on this day also is commemorated the ascension of Elijah the prophet into heaven,
being alive in the body. This zealous prophet lived in the days of Ahab the king, and his
soul was in travail each day, and all day, because of the deeds of the king and his
abominable wife. Then his soul became angry, and he stood up before the king and said
unto him, “Why hast thou forsaken the God of heaven, thou and thy wife Elzabel (Jezebel),
in Whose hand is thy soul, and [why] do ye worship the idol Baal? And why have ye
taken the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite? By the life of the Lord God of Israel, I swear
that no rain shall descend upon the earth from heaven except at my word.” And
straightway, whilst yet the words were in his mouth, the rivers dried up, and the green herb
withered, and there was a famine in all the land. And when God saw that Elijah the
prophet by reason of his jealously for His honor afflicted himself concerning the famine,
He commanded him to go to Dabra Karen (?), and a raven used to bring him food every
day; and God willed to perform the wish of the prophet, and He did not permit his word to
be made a lie. And God willed and sent to him a raven with food, but Elijah would not
receive the food from the bird, because, according to the Law of the Old Testament, the
raven was an unclean bird. Did he perchance spare himself because of the famine, and
command rain to fall? And the prophet took the food from the raven and it defiled him
not. And God commanded the stream from which he used to drink to dry up, so that,
peradventure, when he was thirsty he might have compassion upon men, and command
rain to fall. And in this matter the prophet did not spare himself, and moreover, he came
nigh to die through hunger and thirst. And God commanded him to go to Sarepta of
Sidona where he was fed by widow woman. And God thought that by [making him do]
this he would journey through the cities, and see the bodies of the dead cast out on the road
side, and would have compassion on the people in his heart, and command the rain to fall.
And when Elijah went to Sarepta of Sidona, he found that widow woman gathering
firewood, and he asked for bread from her that he might eat. And she said unto him, “As
God liveth and as thy soul liveth I have only a handful of flour in my house, and I am
265

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
going to make it [into bread] for my son, and we shall eat it and die; and also I have a little
fat in a pot.” And the prophet said unto her, “Bring me a little water that I may drink, and
a little bread that I may eat, and afterwards do thou eat.” And the woman said in her heart,
“Even if I am to die it is better for me to make it [into bread] for this pilgrim as he wisheth,
and I will make merry and think that I have eaten it myself.” When the prophet knew the
beauty of her mind and the integrity of her nature, he had compassion in his heart, and he
asked God for rain. And God accepted the word of the prophet because he had done this
on account of his jealously for Him. And Elijah said unto her, “Believe me, and go and do
as thou thinkest, but make for me first a cake baked on the ashes, (then make one for
thyself afterwards,) and bring it to me, and afterwards thou shalt make one for thyself and
thy son, for thus saith God, “Thy flour barrel shall never become empty, and the fat in thy
pot shall never finish until [the day] when God shall send rain upon the earth’”; and it
came to pass even as the prophet said. And the woman went and made [the cake], even as
the prophet commanded her, and he dwelt with her until the days of the famine had ended.
And the woman had a son who fell sick and died, and she rent her garments and made
lamentation, and took the child and carried him to Elijah into the upper chamber, and she
wept and entreated Elijah, in God’s Name, on behalf of the child. And Elijah laid his face
upon him, and the child came to life straightway; and it is said that this child was Jonah the
prophet. Then Elijah sent his disciple to Ahab, King of Israel, and he said unto him,
“Behold the descent of rain from heaven is nigh.” And the king searched for Elijah and
wanted to kill him, because he had shut up the heavens so that no rain fell for three years
and seven months. And then Elijah took the prophets of Baal and slaughtered them with
his own hand. When Elzabel (Jezebel), the wife of Ahab the king, heard this she was
wroth, and she sent messengers after Elijah and she wished to kill him because he had
killed the prophets of Baal. And Elijah was very sorry because of this, and he said, “O
God, they have slain Thy prophets, and have overthrown Thy altars, and I only am left, and
they wish to kill my soul.” And God said unto him, “Fear thou not, for I have left unto Me
seventy men who have not worshipped the idol Baal. As for thyself, who can take away
thy soul? I will take thee up into heaven whilst thou art living in the body.” When Ahab
the king was dead, his son reigned in his stead, and he did evil before God. And he fell
sick of a disease, and he sent messengers to the idol Afron to ask him whether he would
recover from his illness or not. And Elijah the prophet met the messengers of the king, and
he said unto them, “Say ye to the king: Thou shalt died of this disease.” And when they
told the king this, he knew that the man [who spoke this] was Elijah, the prophet, and he
sent him a captain, and fifty soldiers with him. And Elijah was sitting on the top of a
mountain, and the captain said unto him, “O prophet of God, descend and come to the
king.” And Elijah the prophet said unto him, “If I be a prophet of God, let fire come down
form heaven and consume thee”; and fire came down from heaven and consumed him, and
those who were with him. And the king sent unto him a second captain, and there were
fifty soldiers with him. And he said unto him, “O prophet of God, descend and come to
the king.” And Elijah said unto him, “If I be a prophet of God, let fire come down from
heaven and consume thee”; and straightway fire came down from heaven and consumed
that captain and those who were with him. And the king sent a third captain to him, and
that captain came to him humbly, and he bowed down before the prophet, when still some
distance from him, and he asked him, saying, “Have mercy on my soul”; and Elijah came
down and went with him to the king, even as God commanded. And he rebuked the king
for his evil deeds, and the king died on his bed. Then Elijah went to the River Jordan, and
with him was Elisa his disciple, and he threw his garment on the River Jordan and divided
266

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
it into two parts, and passed over. And behold there came a mist, and an earthquake, and
flashes of lightning, and horses of fire, and they carried off Elijah the prophet, and bore
him up into heaven. And then his disciple Elisa wept and said, “O my father Elijah,
[behold] the chariots of Israel! Let a double portion of thy spirit rest upon me.” And
Elijah rent his garment into two parts, and threw [them] on Elisa, and the spirit was
doubled upon him. And all the miracles which Elijah performed Elisa his disciple
performed also. Elijah passed over the River Jordan once, and Elisa passed over it twice;
Elijah raised from the dead one dead man, and Elisa raised two. And Elisa his disciple
performed many miracles, for the Holy Spirit which was on Elijah was doubled on him.
And Elijah the prophet and Enoch shall come together in the last days, and they shall
rebuke the false Christ, and they shall kill his people, and their bodies shall be cast out for
three days and a half, and then they shall be raised up, and the resurrection of the dead
shall take place. This prophet Elijah was a righteous man, and he was the first to live in
the Garden in the days of the Old Testament.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Makaryanu (Marcianus), the eighth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This saint was appointed Archbishop after the
Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ; and one hundred years after the second destruction
and pillage of Jerusalem, in the ninth year [of his office]. And he remained in his office for
nine years, teaching the people and confirming them in the True Faith; and he converted
very many of the infidels and pagans, and brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And he baptized them with Christian baptism, and illumined them with the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Law of Christianity. And this father pursued a
good course life, and walked prudently, and he pleased God and died in peace.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Basil, Bishop of Caesarea. The name of the
father of this saint was Esderos, and he was a priest, holy and pure, and was a man of the
city of Antioch. And he begot four sons, Basil, and Gregory Peter, and Cherion, and
Macrinus; and they were all holy and perfect men. And this saint was filled with the Holy
Ghost, and he composed the well-known Liturgy which beareth his name. And God
performed very many signs and wonders by his hands, which are written down in the
history of his strife, and of them are the seven following. FIRST MIRACLE: The story of
Peter, the brother of the Bishop of the city of Sebastia, and how he had a wife, and how the
people reviled him because of this wife, and how Basil came to him, and revealed his
spiritual fight to the people, and the mystery of his relations with his wife, and how Peter
and his wife were virgins, and had no knowledge whatsoever of the operation of sin. And
Basil informed the people how he saw the angel of God overshadowing them [in bed], and
how the people saw Saint Peter, and the blessed woman his wife, with the angel of God
overshadowing them, and how the people marveled and glorified God, and bowed down at
the feet of the blessed Peter, and asked him to forgive them their transgression, and how he
forgave all those who had slandered him. SECOND MIRACLE: Concerned the church
which the heretics and schismatics seized by violence, but were unable to open the doors
thereof; but when the believers prayed the doors were opened through the prayer of Basil.
THIRD MIRACLE: The story of Saint Abba Ephraim, who saw a pillar of light which
reached from the earth to heaven; and he heard a voice, saying, “This is Basil.” And Saint
Ephraim came to the city of Caesarea, and he saw the virtues and the righteousness of the
blessed Basil. And Saint Basil appointed Ephraim a deacon, and prayed over him, and he
made him to speak in the Greek tongue. FOURTH MIRACLE: The story of the wise
astrologer, who never made a mistake in his computations. When Saint Basil was sick,
267

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and he knew that the time of his death [was nigh], he summoned that astrologer and said
unto him, “When am I going to die?” And the astrologer said unto him, “Thou wilt die in
the evening, and thy soul shall go forth from thy body [at the time].” And Saint Basil said
unto him, “If I remain [alive], and do not die until the morning, wilt thou became a
Christian?” And the astrologer said unto him, “Yea.” And Saint Basil entreated God, and
God added three days to his days, and that wise and learned Jewish astrologer, who was
the greatest of his class, believed, and Saint Basil baptized him and all the men of his
house with Christian baptism, and then he died in peace. FIFTH MIRACLE: The story of
the man who denied Christ, and who wrote his denial of Christ with his own hand upon a
paper, and gave it to Satan. And Saint Basil shut up that man in a certain place, and he
prayed to God so earnestly that at length Satan brought back that paper which the man had
written; and thus Saint Basil saved him. SIXTH MIRACLE: The story of the priest who
was a virgin, and his wife, who had with them a man who was sick of dire disease, and
how Basil knew of the integrity of the priest and his wife, and how he slept with the sick
man that night, and how he prayed to God on his behalf, and how the man was healed of
his sickness straightway. SEVENTH MIRACLE: The story of the honorable lady who
wrote down a list of all her sins on a piece of paper, and sealed it and gave it to Saint Basil,
and asked him to pray on her behalf to God until all her sins, which were written down on
that sealed paper, were blotted out. And Saint Basil prayed on her behalf until all the sins,
with the exception of one, were blotted out; and the blessed Basil commanded her to go to
Saint Abba Ephraim, so that he might pray for that sin to be blotted out. And when she
went to Saint Abba Ephraim, he spoke to her, saying, “Hasten and get thee back to the
blessed Basil before he dieth, and he will forgive thee, for he is the chief of priests.” And
when she returned she found that Saint Basil was dead, and the bearers had lifted him up
and were carrying him on his bier to bury him. And the woman wept with a bitter
weeping, and she laid that paper upon his body, and that sin which was written on the
paper was blotted out from it. When all the people who were there saw this miracle they
marveled exceedingly, and glorified God, Who giveth such grace to those who fear Him.
And Saint Basil performed many signs and miracles besides those which we have written
here in this book. And he composed many beautiful Homilies and Instructions for monks,
and he translated many Books of the Old and New Testaments, and he drew up Canons
which are to be found in the hands of believers unto this day.
Salutation to Noah and his wife and sons. Salutation to Basil. Salutation to Abba Moses,
who dwelt in the desert sixty winters. He gazed at the hearts of the saints until he became
stupefied, and his face changed and became coals of fire. Salutation to Makaryanu
(Marcianus), the eighth Archbishop of Alexandria. Salutation to the circumcision of our
Lord.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

268

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TIR 07
(January 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba Sol-Petros (Silvester), Archbishop of the city of Rome.
Because of the strenuousness of his spiritual fight, and his virtues, and his devotion to the
ascetic life, and his knowledge, and his righteousness, they appointed him Archbishop of
the city of Rome, after the death of Meletianus, Archbishop of Rome, his predecessor. He
was appointed in the eleventh year of the reign of the Emperor Constantine the Great. And
being seated on the throne of Peter, the chief of the Apostles, he baptized Constantine with
Christian baptism. Now Constantine did not repent, and was not baptized until the
eleventh year of his reign, because up till that time he was occupied in working and
fighting against unbelievers, and in killing them. And he pulled down the houses of idols,
and built churches to the honor of God. And the striving of this father Sol-Petros
(Silvester) shone exceeding brightly, and he taught the people frequently, and he removed
the doubt and the evil thought of the Satans from their hearts, and he explained things
which were obscure to them, and made them to understand them; and he disputed
frequently with the Jews and the Greeks. And he converted many of them and brought
them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he baptized them with Christian baptism,
and his name was respected and feared by believers. And he composed many discourses
and vanquished [his opponents], and he wrote books on the knowledge of God and on the
Incarnation of the Son, and through them he gave drink to the soul of the man who was
thirsting for the knowledge of God. In the seventh year of his archiepiscopate the
assembling of the General Council of the Three Hundred and Eighteen Holy Fathers in the
city of Nicea took place. This holy father Sol-Petros (Silvester) anathematized Arius, and
he excommunicated him and all those who believed his words. He sat for eleven years,
and finished his strife nobly, and he pleased God and died in peace. Salutation to SolPetros (Silvester), who baptized Constantine, the Inventor of the Cross.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Abba Ephraim. Salutation to Ephraim, the
father was filled with wisdom.
And on this day also are commemorated Mosolon (Salomon), and Gregory, and Mark, and
Antianus, and Luya, and Maylen, and Sosyas, and Marteya
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 08
(January 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day was consecrated the church of Saint Abba Macarius, of the desert of Scete, by
the hand of the honorable saint Abba Benjamin, the thirty-eighth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This took place after great tribulation had come upon him through Makokaz
(Makawkas), the heretic, the Melchite; and Abba Benjamin fled into Upper Egypt, [and
269

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
stayed there] till the end of ten years. When God had destroyed that heretic Makokas
(Makawkas), and the churches and the Christians were at rest and in peace, Abba Benjamin
returned to his throne, and lived in his own house. And the chief monks of the holy desert
of Scete came to him, and they asked him to go with them and consecrate the new church,
that is to say, the church of Abba Macarius; and he rose up and went with them in great
joy, and he consecrated the church. And when he began to anoint the table of the altar with
the holy Meron oil, the saint saw the hand of God anointing it with him, and he fell upon
his face in great fear. And one of the Cherubim raised him up and said unto him, “Rise up,
be not afraid, and write for this place a holy rule, for it is God’s mystery. And no man
shall enter it in pride of heart, nor by bribery, but only him that is appointed thereto; and no
man shall dare to speak a vain word therein, for it is a house of the holy things of God.
This Canon shall be the rule in this sanctuary for ever. For behold the days shall come
when they shall destroy the commandments which their fathers ordained, and they shall
not discharge their obligations, and the holy place shall become a place of scoffing.” And
Abba Benjamin said, “Verily this is the house of God, and this is the door of heaven.” And
as he was holding converse with the Cherub, he looked towards the west of the church and
saw an aged man with a beautiful face, and a long beard, and his countenance was shining
like that of an angel. And Abba Benjamin was pleased when he saw that [old man], and he
said within himself, “If one of the bishops were to die, I should make this old man bishop
in his stead.” And the Cherub said unto him, “O Benjamin, whouldst thou make this old
man bishop? This is Abba Macarius, the father of all archbishops, and bishops, and
monks, and he hath come in the spirit this day to rejoice with his sons; and not an
archbishop who was appointed by him, and not one of his sons, will be absent, neither will
the spiritual fruits of his monasteries be wanting.” And the Cherub said unto him, “If his
sons have kept his commandments, and have followed in his steps, they will be with him
where he is in glory; but if they have transgressed his commandments they shall not share
[his] inheritance with him.” And Abba Macarius said unto the angel, the Cherub, “My
lord, do not decide about my sons in these words; but if there be left in the bunch only a
single grape, the blessing of God shall be on it. If there be left in them love for each other
I believe that God will not drive them away from His kingdom.” And the Archbishop
Abba Benjamin marveled at the mercy of Abba Macarius; and Abba Benjamin wrote a
Canon and placed it in the church for a perpetual memorial. And he asked our Lord Jesus
Christ that his death might take place as it were to-day, and in consequence he died on the
eighth day of the month of Ter.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Andronicus, the thirty-seventh Archbishop
of the city of Alexandria. This holy man was a deacon, and a son of one of the elders of
the city of Alexandria, and he was a wise and a merciful man, and he was learned in the
Books of the Church. The son of his father’s brother was governor of Alexandria, and
because of his office, and the size of his house, this saint did not live in monasteries as did
all the archbishops his predecessors, but he lived in his nephew’s house in the city of
Alexandria all the days of his life and archiepiscopate. And this father was appointed
archbishop in the tenth year of the reign of Heraclius, Emperor of Rome, in the nine
hundred and thirty-third year of the kingdom of King Alexander (A.D. 621-2). And in the
days of his father Kesra (Khusrau), King of Persia, rose up, and he was an infidel and
worshipped the sun. And he gathered together his armies, now they were many, and he
invaded the country of Rome, and the countries of Syria and Palestine, and he laid waste
these countries, and carried off their goods. Then he attacked the country of Egypt and
came to the city of Alexandria, [round about which] there were two hundred monasteries,
270

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
which were full of monks, and also full of goods and possessions wherewith the monks
lived lives of pleasure. And because of this God gave the King of Persia a dominion over
them, and he plundered the monasteries, and slew all the monks who were in them, and
only the few were left alive who hid themselves from him and escaped; and to this day
these monasteries have neither been [re]-built nor [re]-consecrated. And when the men of
Alexandria heard what the Persians had done, they opened to them the gates of the city.
And Kesra (Khusrau) the king saw in a dream and it seemed as if one said unto him,
“Behold, I have given this city into thy hand. Thou shalt not lay it waste, but slay the
strong men who are therein, for they are men of violence. And take the king of the city,
and bind him in fetters, and send him away.” And he ordered the men of the city to bring
unto him the strong young men, the days of whose years were from eighteen years up to
forty or fifty years, so that he might give each of them twenty dinars in gold, and might
enroll them as soldiers to serve in his regiments and armies, and protect the city. And the
people imagined that what he said was the truth, and eighty hundred men went out to him.
And when he began to count all their numbers, they imagined that they were going to
receive gold; but as soon as he had finished counting them all, he slew them with the
sword. And then he went up into Upper Egypt, and came to the city Nikyus (Pshati, in the
province of Menu). and he heard that in the cells, and in the monasteries and religious
houses, there were seven hundred monks whose works were evil, and he killed them all
with the sword. And when Heraclius, the Emperor of Rome, heard of what the King of
Persia had done, he gathered together his army, and marched against him, and slew all his
army, and plundered all his country. And the spiritual fight of this Abba Andronicus was
exceedingly good, and he sat for seven years, and he pleased God, and he died in peace in
the three hundred and forty-seventh year of the martyrs (A.D. 631), before the kingdom of
the Arabs [was established] in the country of Egypt.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Benjamin, the thirty-eighth Archbishop of
the city of Alexandria. This was a man of the city of Barset, and the son of one of the
wealthy men thereof, and he became a monk, in his early years, with a certain holy man
whose name was Tewenas (Theonas), in a monastery to the west of the city of Alexandria.
And he grew continually in good works, and he became very learned in the Scriptures, and
in the Books of the Church. One night he saw a vision and it seemed as if one said unto
him, “Rejoice, O Benjamin, for thou shalt pasture the flock of Christ.” And he told his
teacher that he had seen a vision, and his teacher said unto him, “Beware of Satans, lest
they lead thee astray by pride.” And he added to his virtues and to his righteousness, and
then his teacher took him with him, and carried him to Abba Andronicus, and told him of
the vision which his son Benjamin had seen; and Abba Andronicus made him a priest, and
delivered to him the charge of the church, and he continued to administer the church
rightly and well until Abba Adronicus died, and then he was appointed archbishop. And
great tribulation fell upon him while he held office. And before the great tribulation came
upon him, the angel of God appeared unto him, and told him what would happen unto him,
and commanded him to flee, and to take his bishops with him. And this father consecrated
the Offering and administered to the people the Holy Mysteries, and he commanded them
to be strong in the True Faith, and he made them to know what was going to happen. And
then he sent letters to all the bishops, and to all the heads of the monasteries, and
commanded them to take to flight. Then he departed into the desert of Scete, to the
monastery of Abba Macarius, and from there he departed into Upper Egypt. And
Heraclius, Emperor of Rome, had dominion over the churches, and over the believers, and
he punished very many of them. And he seized the brother of Abba Benjamin, whose
271

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
name was Minas, and he tortured him, and burnt his sides with fire, and afterwards he had
him drowned in the river. And in those days the Emperor Heraclius saw in his sleep that
one said unto him, “Behold there shall come upon thee many people who are circumcised,
and they shall overcome thee, and shall rule over the country.” Now he imagined that
these people would be Jews, and that he would baptize many of them, but the vision which
he saw referred to the kingdom of the Muslims. And they were Muslims, and they came to
him from the land of Yatreb which is a district and a kingdom in the land of Syria. And in
those days ‘Amr, the son of As, came to the land of Egypt, and he ruled over it, and dwelt
therein for three years. In the one hundred and nineteenth year (sic) of the martyrs ‘Amr
came to the city of Alexandria, and he destroyed the fortress thereof, and he burned many
churches, and he burned the church of Saint Mark the Evangelist, on the sea-shore, which
is known to be now under the earth (i.e. submerged). And he likewise burned the
monasteries and the churches which were round about the city of Alexandria, and he
carried off as spoil all the goods which were in them. Then the captain of the soldiers
brought ships to the church of the Blessed Mark, and he thrust his hand into the
sarcophagus and found the body of Saint Mark and carried it to this ship. And when ‘Amr,
the son of As, learned the story of Abba Benjamin, and why he had fled, he wrote his letter
and sent it into every district in Egypt, saying, “Come, be not afraid, and govern thy people
and thy churches.” And Abba Benjamin came forth from the place whither he had fled in
the tenth (?) year of the reign of the Emperor Heraclius, and in the third year of the
kingdom of the Muslims. And ‘Amr, the son of As, honored Abba Benjamin with great
honor, and he commanded his soldiers to give back the churches, and all their possessions,
and all their lands to his priests. And he said unto him, “Pray for me, for I am going to the
country of the West, and I will become the king over the Five Cities, and when I come
back I will do whatsoever thou desirest.” And Abba Benjamin said unto him, “God shall
make straight thy path”; and he told him everything that would happen unto him. And
when ‘Amr wished to go away, they brought nigh the ships so that the soldiers might
depart, and outside the port they took all the ships, except the ship in which was the head
of Saint Mark the Evangelist, for that would not go out of the port. And all the sailors
gathered together, and tied ropes to that ship, and to these they tied other ropes and hauled,
but the ship would not leave the port. And ‘Amr, the governor, said, “Burn this ship,” but
the captain was afraid to do so, and he told ‘Amr that he was afraid, because of the head of
Saint Mark the Evangelist which was in it, and he revealed the matter to him. And the
governor sent to Abba Benjamin and told him about the head of Saint Mark the Evangelist,
and that night Abba Benjamin saw a vision, and in it Saint Mark said unto him, “Prepare
for me a place with thee.” And when Abba Benjamin heard these words he rose up, and
went to the governor, and told him [about the vision], and he said unto him, “This is the
head of Saint Mark the Evangelist.” And as soon as Abba Benjamin had taken from the
ship the head of Saint Mark, that ship left the port immediately. When the governor saw
this he marveled exceedingly, and he gave Abba Benjamin much money, and commanded
him to build a church for Saint Mark; and Abba Benjamin built a beautiful church for him,
and laid the head and body of the saint in it. And this father fought strenuously with the
pagans, and he converted many of them, and brought them into the True Faith and
confirmed them. And in the days of this saint God brought a great and severe famine upon
all countries, and no famine which had ever been before it was so dire. And countless
people died of this famine, and their bodies were cast into the highways and market-places
of the cities. And Abba Benjamin suffered from a disease in his foot for twenty years, and
he died in peace; and all the days of his archiepiscopate were nine and thirty years.
272

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also [died] Melkeyas (Malachi) the prophet and righteous man, whom they
call “Malak.” This prophet was born after the people returned from the Captivity, in a
place which is called Sufas. When he was a young man he followed a good course of life,
and all the people honored him for his righteousness, and for this reason they called him
“Melkeyas” (Malachi), which is, being interpreted, “angel” (or “prince”), because his
appearance was exceeding goodly; and he described in his prophecy everything which was
to come to pass. And the angel of God used to appear unto him by night, and hold
converse with him, but the people never saw the angel, and they only heard his voice; now
some of them were worthy to see his face openly, even as it is written in the Book of
Judges. And being still a young man he died and was buried with his fathers in his own
field. Salutation to Melkeyas (Malachi).
Salutation to Andronicus, who after living on the top of a pillar for seventy years died
before the coming of the Muslim kings into Egypt.
Salutation to Abba Benjamin who was so learned in the Scriptures that he was made
Archbishop of Alexandria.
Salutation to the consecration of thy house [O Mark the Evangelist], by Abba Benjamin.
[These salutations are omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 09
(January 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Abraham. The father of this saint was a merciful
man, and he loved the poor. And in his days there was a great famine in the land of Egypt,
and he gave all his money to the poor; now he was a very rich man. And because of his
integrity and his trustworthiness, all the crops of all the fields of every village which were
round about his city, and all the crops of his own fields were entrusted to his care, and they
were all in his hands. When the famine came he gave all the grain which he had by him to
the poor and needy. And God placed compassion in the hearts of the rulers and noblemen,
who sent to him and demanded from him the grain which they had deposited with him.
And he went to them, and they said nothing whatsoever to him about the grain, and they
wrote him a paper to the effect that he had brought to each of them their grain. Now his
mother was a God-fearing woman, and Satan was jealous of her, and he brought great
tribulation upon her. And he entered into the heart of a certain evil man, and he gave
information against her to the men of Persia, and they made her captive and carried her off
to Persia. And one night she saw a vision wherein the man who had laid information
against her was bound with a chain of fire in Sheol, and one said unto her, “Dost thou see
what God hath done, and how I have taken vengeance on the man who laid information
against thee?” And she said unto him who was showing her this, “My lord, I do not wish
suffering and tribulation to come upon him, for he died, and went to Sheol.” And he who
was showing her this vision said unto her, “As for thee, thou shalt certainly return to thy
country, and dwell in thy house”; and this actually came to pass. And when her husband
273

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
died, and Saint Abraham was an orphan, his mother wished to get him married, but he did
not wish this to happen at all; and she rejoiced in him exceedingly. And when he sought to
go and become a monk, she went with him outside the city to set him on his way and to bid
him farewell, and she lifted up her hands to heaven, and prayed, and she committed her son
to God, and said, “O my Lord, accept from me this offering.” And Abba Abraham
departed and traveled through the desert of Scete, and came to the monastery of Saint Abba
Macarius, in the days of Abba John, the Abbot of the desert of Scete; and he came to him
and was to him as a beloved son, and he fought a great and a good fight. And one day the
roof split open, and he saw our Lord Christ, Who came down to him sitting upon the
throne of the chariot of the Cherubim, who were singing his praises. And he was afraid
and trembled, and made haste and bowed down to Him and our Lord blessed him, and
went up into heaven with great glory. And the miracle of the split roof of the house
through which our Lord Jesus Christ came down is remembered unto this day. And
Abraham’s abode was near that of his spiritual father, Abba John, the abbot, and it is called
to-day “Begbig.” And the angel of God used to summon him frequently, and he would
reveal unto him many mysteries. And then Abba Abraham, and he continued in that illness
for eighteen years. And when his death drew nigh he asked them to administer to him the
Holy Body and Honorable Blood of our Lord Christ, and they administered to him in the
spirit, and told him, saying, “Behold, God inviteth thee to the great marriage-feast”; and
then he died in peace, his days being eighty years. And their house existeth to this day,
and their tombs are known to this day. Salutation to Abraham.
Salutation to thee, O thou who dost hide in the city of Nazareth.
And on this day also are commemorated the holy fathers George, and Nosmes, and Diskres
(Dioscurus).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 10
(January 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
Our learned fathers of the Church who were before us, the chiefs of the Councils, have laid
down the law that believers should fast on this day until the evening, and that they should
eat no kind of moist (or, fatty) food whatsoever, and only that kind which is eaten during
the Great Fast of Lent. And the reason why the fathers ordained that believers should fast
on this day until the evening is this: The holy Apostles commanded in the Canon, saying,
“If the festival of the Birth or the festival of the Baptism fall on the Fourth Day of the
week, or on the Sixth Day of the week, let them eat in the morning every kind of food
which is eaten at Pentecost, for these two festivals are to God, so that men may not
imagine that we regale ourselves with the luxuries of this fleeting world. And let us not
make our feasts with meats and drink like the festivals of the Jews and pagans.” Therefore
our learned fathers of the Church, who were before us, have commanded us to fast these
two days, namely, before the festival of the Birth and the festival of the Baptism. And
these two days shall take the place of the Fourth Day of the week and the Sixth Day of the
274

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
week when the festival of the Birth and the festival of the Baptism fall on them, and two
matters shall be fulfilled by us, the matter of fasting and the matter of the festival; and this
is ordained in the churches of the Egyptians. And if the day of Bayramum fall on the First
Day of the week, or on the Sabbath of the Jews, one shall fast on the Fourth Day of the
week preceding it until the evening, and shall only eat what it is meet to eat during the
Great Fast. And if the festival of the Birth and the festival of the Baptism fall on the
Sabbath, or on the First Day of the week, or on the second day, it is impossible to fast on
the day preceding the Sabbath and the First Day of the week, but they shall eat what is
eaten during the Great Fast. And on the night of the festival of the Baptism they shall rise
up before midnight, and pray over the water and dip themselves in it. And the reason why
they must rise up before midnight is that the young may not be cast away in the water
when they are baptized. And they shall consecrate the Offering before the day dawneth,
and they shall come into the church very early, even as the Apostles commanded in the
holy Canon. And the Melchites, if the festival of the Birth and the festival of the Baptism
fall on the day before the Sabbath, on the First Day of the week, fast on the sixth day of the
week preceding the festival until the ninth hour, according to their frequent custom. And
on the day before the Sabbath; and before the First Day of the week, they ordain the
consecration (of the Eucharist), at the third hour or earlier, they eat a young . . . and drink if
they wish. And then the priests sit in the church, and pray the prayer of the hours, and read
the prophecy which is suitable for the festival. And they pray over the water at the time of
evening on that day, which is the tenth day of the month of Ter. But this is not according
to what the Apostles commanded in the holy Canon, for the pure Apostles commanded
them to keep the festival of the Epiphany, which is, being interpreted, the “appearance of
our God” on the seventh day of the month of Ter. And the Melchites transgress the
command of the holy fathers, the doctors of the Church, and they eat on the day of the
festival, in the morning if it fall on the Fourth or the Sixth Day of the week, and they do
not fast on the day before it instead of it. As for us, we ask our Lord Christ to cleanse us
from all our sins, and to reveal the glory of His Godhead in our hearts even as He revealed
it in the River Jordan--to Him be glory, etc.
And on this day died Abba Tawbentos (Theopantus). This saint was brought up from his
youth in the house of Abba Tauna (Theonas), Archbishop of Romya, and it was he who
arrayed him in the garb of the monastic life. And when the archbishop saw that he was
endowed with wisdom and strength he made him a bishop, and the head of a monastery
outside the city of Alexandria in a place which is called Tinadiran; and the number of the
monks who were subject to his rule was seven hundred. And after this when Tawbentos
(Theopantus?), the bishop and preacher and the brethren who were with him, heard of the
commotion which was taking place through the Emperor Diocletian, the heretic, and
worshipper of idols, he fled and departed to Dabra Sihat, and took up his abode with a
God-fearing virgin, and he lived hidden in her house for a long time. At the beginning of
his stay he found that she worshipped idols through fear of the emperor, but he converted
her from error to the Faith of Christ. And from there he went to Dabra Tarnut and Dabra
Marmus, wishing to hear the histories of the churches of Egypt, and he lived in each
monastery hidden for two or three days (?), submitting himself to fasting, and prayer, and
many vigils. And all the brethren testified that the gift of the Holy Spirit had descended
upon him, and God wrought signs and miracles by his hands, and he even converted many
thieves and robbers to the service of Christ, and made them monks. And having grown
very old and grey, and knowing that the day of his departure was nigh, he exhorted his
275

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
children to be strong in the True Faith, and to keep his commandments, and he died in
peace.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Kinaria (Cynarius), and Batrika (Patricia)
the queen, and Tomiani the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 11
(January 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized in the River Jordan by John the Baptist.
And the festival which is kept on this day is called in the tongue of the Greeks “Ipiphany,”
which is, being interpreted, “the appearance of the Godhead,” because on this day appeared
the mystery of the Holy Trinity--the Father, saying from heaven, “This is my Son Whom I
love, in Whom I am well pleased. Hear Him.” And the Son was standing in the Jordan,
and the Holy Spirit, in the form of a dove, was standing on Him, even as John the Baptist
was a witness of this, saying, “Our Lord Christ, having been baptized, went up out of the
water; and straightway the heavens were rent, and the Holy Spirit came down upon Him
like a dove. And a voice came from heaven, saying, This is My Son Whom I love, with
Whom I am well pleased. Hear Him.” And on this day our Lord revealed Himself, (now,
for a period of thirty years He had not revealed Himself to anyone), and on this day He
revealed Himself to the children of Israel. And John the Evangelist was a witness, and
John the Baptist was a witness to Him before the people, and he openly said unto them,
“This is the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sin of the world.” And His pronouncement
I do not understand, and only that He appeared unto Israel, and because of this I came out
to baptize Him with water. And at this festival the glory of Christ appeared, as that of the
Son of God, and His own glory as the Lamb of God, Who taketh away the sins of the
world. Because of this the festival this day is a great festival among all Christian peoples,
and they cleanse themselves with holy water in imitation of the Baptism of our Lord
Christ; and they received during this festival remission of their sins, provided that they
continue in the purity which they have received. Therefore it is meet for us to keep, and
serve, and glorify the abundant grace of our God and Redeemer Jesus Christ, Who became
man for our sakes, and delivered us from our sins.
And on this day also Saint Anatolius became a martyr. This saint was one of the men of
Persia, and he was made a general of the army of Rome, and he continued in his office for
fifteen years. When the Emperor Diocletian denied Christ, this saint chose the kingdom of
heaven, and rejected the honor of this fleeting world. And he came and stood up before the
Emperor Diocletian, and he unfastened his belt [and cast it away from him], and he cursed
the emperor and his idols; and the emperor was amazed at his daring. And when the
emperor learned that he was a Persian nobleman, he spoke to him fair and persuaded him
[to reject Christ], and he then handed him over to Khermanos, the general, that
peradventure he might be able to convert him from the Faith of Christ. And when
Khermanos was unable to change his thoughts from the Godhead of Christ, he brought him
276

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
back to the emperor who condemned him to be tortured with every kind of torture. And
our Lord Christ sent His angel to him, and he comforted him in every tribulation. And the
emperor tortured him for many days, and doubled his tortures, and he hung him up on the
wheel, and beat him several times; and the soldiers flayed him, and cut out his tongue, and
they threw him to the ravening beasts, and then they cast him into a dark place. And he
delivered up his soul thrice, but God raised him up. And when Diocletian the infidel was
wearied with torturing him, he commanded them to cut off his head with the sword, [and
they did so], and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
And on this day also died Saint Abba John, the seventy-fourth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This father was a merchant before he was made Archbishop of Alexandria,
and he traded with the country of India, and he was always traveling on the sea. First of all
he became a deacon in the church of Saint Mercurius, the martyr, in Mesr (Cairo). And he
became a scribe, but he abandoned the scribe’s profession and became a merchant. And
[the bishops] elected him archbishop, and they enthroned him on Sunday, the fourth day of
the month of Yakatit (Feb.-March) in the nine hundred and fifth year of the martyrs (A.D.
1189); and he protected his flock well. And he had very much money before he was made
archbishop, that is to say, a sum of twenty thousand dinars in gold. And he gave all his
money in his lifetime to the poor Christians, and to the churches and monasteries, and all
his money came to an end before his death, and he died in debt to his brother’s son.
During the days of his archiepiscopate he never ate bread at the expense of any Christian
person, or at the expense of any nobleman, or any poor man; and he never accepted a
present (or fee) from any of them. He held his office for eight and twenty years, and he
died on the day of the festival of the Baptism (i.e. Epiphany), on the eleventh day of the
month of Ter in the nine hundred and thirty-second year of the martyrs (A.D. 1216).
And on this day also died Saint Justus, and Saint Fayos.
And on this day also died the holy father and fighter Abba Wakris. This saint was brought
up with Basil the Great, and he made him a priest; and he was of goodly appearance, and
his face was very pleasing. As a young man his first act was to desire the governor’s wife,
for he loved her dearly, and she loved him, and they made a plan together to go to another
place where they could fulfill their desires. And whilst they were taking pains to arrange
this matter Wakris saw himself in a dream bound in fetters, and standing up before the
governor’s tribune, and there were many bound in fetters with him, and each one of them
was being questioned concerning his sins. And he said in his heart, “What is the meaning
of my being fettered? Can it possibly be because of this woman, with whom I wish to
defraud her husband, who will lay information against me and have me brought to this
serious state?” And whilst he was feeling disturbed over this matter there came unto him a
man in the form of an old friend, and he said unto him, “What is the meaning of this thy
being fettered?” And Wakris wished to hide himself, and was ashamed of his sin. And
when his friend pressed him, he said unto him, “O my friend, thus and thus have I done. It
seemeth to me that so and so hath laid an information against me, because of his wife, and
because of this I am afraid and am troubled.” And the angel who had come unto him in the
form of his friend, said unto him, “O my beloved, swear unto me by the Gospel that thou
wilt not do this thing, and [then] thou shalt not go back to it a second time; I will be surety
for thee.” And Wakris swore to him by the Gospel. And when he woke up from his sleep
he knew that the vision which he had seen was true, and he therefore left his city and
departed to Alexandria, where he found a certain God-fearing woman, whose name was
277

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Helani; and when they were holding converse together he told her everything which was in
his heart. And she said unto him, “Abandon thy splendid apparel, and dress thyself in a
humble garb, and make thyself a close follower of God.” And from there he went into the
desert, and he dwelt there and lived upon the herbs thereof until his belly became dried up,
like a stone, and exhaustion seized him, and at length our Lord came and healed him. And
the devils used to tempt him and afflict him severely, but he fought strenuously with
fasting and with prayer. And in the winter time he used to stand naked under the falling
rain, and in the summer he was afflicted by the burning heat of the sun, and by the cold at
night, and at length the gift of the Holy Spirit was given unto him. And the angels used to
come unto him and feed him with the bread of heaven, and give him to drink out of the
heavenly cup, and he was worthy of divine vision so that he might know hidden things.
And he composed three homilies, one on those who dwell in the desert, and one on the
company of the brethren, and one on the priesthood. One day there came unto him a
certain dweller in the desert whose name was Bula, and they embraced each other, and
Bula said unto him, “O my brother Wakris, do not live alone. Make a few of the brethren
to come and live with thee, to comfort thee, and thou shalt be delivered from the war of
Satan”; and he did so. And one day there came to him three Satans who had taken the
forms of the heretics of Arius, and Nestorius, and Mani, and he disputed with them about
their faiths, and he vanquished them by the words of the Holy Scriptures, and by the
doctrine of the Orthodox Fathers; and he worked many miracles, and his miracles were
innumerable. One day having arrived at the church he wished to go in, but found it closed,
and the brethren searched for the keys and could not find them; and having made the sign
of the Cross over the gates they opened to him by his will. And this Wakris is he of whom
it is said, that when the brethren said unto him, “Thy father is dead,” he replied to them,
“Ye lie; my father is a heavenly being and cannot die.” And behold his history is written
in the narrative of his strife, and in the Book of the Histories of the Holy Fathers. And
having grown very old and grey, he departed to God Whom he loved.
Salutation to Thy Baptism by which every man is cleansed of his sins.
Salutation to Thy Baptism which took place at the end of thirty winters.
Salutation to Justus, and to Guedet. Salutation to John, who gave twenty thousand dinars
in silver and gold to the poor and needy.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 12
(January 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the glorious angel, Michael the Archangel. On this
day God sent Michael the Archangel to Jacob-Israel when he was afraid of his brother
Esau, and he delivered him from him, and brought him over the River Jordan. And Jacob
went to Laban his mother’s brother, and married two of his daughters Leah and Rachel.
And Michael brought him back, and smoothed his way to safety, and to peace with his
278

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
brother, together with his possessions and his children. And his brother Esau welcomed
him with peace and love. Therefore is celebrated the festival of Michael the Archangel.
And on this day also Theodore Banadlewos (the Anatolian?), the strong and mighty man
from the East (?), became a martyr. This great fighter was of the men of the city of
Antioch, and he was a kinsman of the royal family. His father’s name was ‘Adrakos, who
was a general in the emperor’s army in the days of Numarnos, the pagan, the Emperor of
Rome; and the name of his mother was Patricia, that is to say, “free born lady,” who was
the sister of Basilides the general. When the Emperor Numerianus died in the was against
the Persians, (now his son Justus was engaged in war), the empire remained without an
emperor. And ‘Adrakos, the father of Theodore, and Basilides, administered the kingdom
until Diocletian the infidel reigned. Now Diocletian was formerly ruler over Egypt, and he
married the daughter of the Emperor Numerianus, who was a sister of Saint Justus, and she
made him emperor. And Saint Theodore having arrived at man’s estate was strong and
mighty in the wars in which he engaged, and he conquered his enemies, and they fled
before him; [and he was so greatly feared] that when the Persians said [to their fellows]
“Behold Theodore hath come,“ their hearts (i.e. courage) would break, and they would
flee. And some of the men who were there said, “Theodore is the god of the men of Rome,
and it is he who raised up twice Nigomidos (Nicomedes), the son of the King of Kuez
(Khuzistan), because of whom Diocletian denied Christ, and worshipped idols. Now
Diocletian had deposited Nigomidos (Nicomedes) with the Archbishop [of Antioch], to be
kept in safety, and the archbishop took from his father gold weighed in a balance, as much
as the young man weighed, and he sent it back to his father. And Saint Theodore was
fighting on the river which is called Bunabesi; and he had a friend who was called
Lavendius. And one night he saw, as it were, a ladder which reached from earth to heaven,
and at the head of the ladder was our Lord sitting upon a great throne, and there were
round about Him thousands of thousands [of angels], and tens of thousands of angels were
standing before Him. And he saw under the ladder a great serpent, which was Satan. And
he who was sitting upon the throne said unto him, “O Theodore, the Anatolian, Dost thou
wish to become a son to Me?” And Theodore the Anatolian said unto Him, “Who art
Thou, my Lord?” And He said unto him, “I am Jesus the Word of God, and, as for thee,
needs must that thou shalt shed thy blood for My Name’s sake.” And then Theodore saw
one of those who were standing there take him and dip him in the Lake of Fire three times,
and his whole person became like fire, and he was like unto those who were standing
round the throne. And Theodore the Anatolian said unto our Lord, “My Lord, I do [not]
wish to be separated from my friend Lavendius.” And our Lord answered and said unto
him, “Not Lavendius only, but Banikoros, the captain of the army of Kuez (Khuzistan)
also.” Then Theodore the Anatolian saw those angels seize Lavendius and [Ba]Nikoros,
and dip them into the Lake of Fire; and they gave them to Theodore the Anatolian, and he
rejoiced with great joy, and they embraced each other. Then the might of God carried
them to the place where was [Ba]Nikoros, the captain of the army of Kuez (Khuzistan),
and he welcomed them, and embraced them, as if he knew them; now they had never seen
him [before]. Then Banikoros described to them that vision, even as they had seen it, and
they marveled exceedingly. And Banikoros said to Theodore the Anatolian, “Know, O my
brother, that they have given me and my brother into thy hand.” Then they rose up
straightway, and came to their soldiers, and they all rose up and made an agreement
together to shed their blood for the Name of our Lord Christ. And it came to pass that at
this time the emperor sent and summoned Theodore the Anatolian to him, and he informed
him that he had made peace with the King of Kuez (Khuzistan). When the Emperor
279

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Diocletian denied our Lord Christ and worshipped idols, the King of Kuez (Khuzistan)
rejoiced exceedingly. And Saint Theodore the Anatolian said unto them, “He who wisheth
to save his soul from the sword, let him depart; and he who wisheth to fight for the Name
of Christ our Lord, let him dwell with us.” And they all cried out with a loud voice,
saying, “The death which thou diest we will die with thee, and thy God is our God.” And
the blessed Theodore the Anatolian said unto them, “If that which ye say be true, get ye all
down into the river and dip yourselves in the water thereof, in the Name of the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit.” And straightway they stripped off their raiment, and went
down into the river, and they dipped themselves therein thrice, even as he told them. And
as they were coming up out of the water they heard a voice from heaven saying, “Be ye
strong, O My martyrs, and be ye conquerors, for I will be with you.” And when Theodore
the Anatolian drew nigh unto the city of Antioch, he left the soldiers outside, and he went
in with his two friends Lavendius and Banikoros, and the emperor welcomed Theodore the
Anatolian with gladness, and he asked him questions about the war and about the army;
and Theodore told him everything that had happened. And after this the emperor reminded
him to worship Apollo in his presence, and Saint Theodore the Anatolian rebuked the
emperor; and the emperor cursed him and his friend Lavendius and his companion
Banikoros, and they cursed the emperor. And Sidrakos, the father of Saint Theodore the
Anatolian, died. And the emperor was wroth, and he commanded his soldiers to carry
away the saints Lavendius and Banikoros to the country of the Menadaweyan, so that they
might be tortured there; now Diocletian was afraid of the Persians, because Banikoros was
captain of the Persians. And they tortured Lavendius and his friend Banikoros, and they
received crowns of martyrdom on the twelfth day of the month of Ter. And as for the
Anatolian, the emperor commanded the soldiers to drive one hundred and fifty-three great
long nails into his body, and they laid him upon a komol tree, and drove those nails into his
body. And God sent His angel Michael the Archangel to him, and he comforted him and
strengthened him in his tribulation. And at that time our Lord Christ appeared unto Saint
Theodore the Anatolian, and He said unto him, “Peace be unto thee, O My chosen one,
Theodore the Anatolian! Bear thou patiently all this suffering. And now, dost thou wish
Me to take out all these nails from thy body, and to heal thee, and to put to shame this
perverse emperor?” And Theodore the Anatolian said unto our Lord Jesus Christ,
“Behold, it is better for me to die for Thy Name’s sake.” And our Lord Jesus said unto
Theodore the Anatolian, “Behold, I have prepared three crowns for thee: one for thy
virginity, and one because thou hast labored for My beloved, and one for thy death for My
Name’s sake. If a man be in grief and sorrow which is very grievous, and tribulation hath
fallen upon him, and he pray to Me in thy name, I will relieve him, and will deliver him,
and will make him glad and will bless him. And if a man be in tribulation at sea in respect
of his ship, and he pray to Me in thy name, I will deliver him. And if a man go into the
battle, or go into a fight, and he call upon thy name, I will deliver him, and will be his
helper. And if a man build a shrine for thee, or write a book of thy strife, or commemorate
thee, or bring a gift in thy name, I will receive him and make him to be glad in the
kingdom of the heavens. And if a man give alms to the poor and needy, or to the orphans,
or to the prisoner, or to the pilgrim, I will forgive him his sin, and I will reward him in the
kingdom of the heavens. And him that doeth a good deed on the day of thy
commemoration and for thy name’s sake, I will receive.” And after this our Lord Jesus
Christ gave Theodore the benediction of peace, and went up into heaven. And Theodore
saw three angels who gave him three crowns, and then he died, and he delivered up his
soul into the hand of God, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
280

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
heavens. And after his death the Emperor Diocletian sent to the soldiers of Theodore
heathen priests carrying idols, and a herald went round proclaiming thus: “Whosoever
loveth the emperor let him worship the glorious gods.” And all the soldiers cried out,
saying, ”There is no king except our Lord Jesus Christ, the King of kings and Lord of
lords.” And when the emperor heard this he sent his soldiers and they cut off the heads of
these men with the sword, and they were in number two hundred and fifty thousand. And
the air was filled with beings of light who placed crowns upon their heads.
Salutation to Thy loving going, O Lord, into the house of the marriage-feast to make water
into wine.
Salutation to Michael the Archangel who went to help Theodore.
Salutation to thee, O Theodore, thou shoot from the country of the East.
Salutation to the two hundred and fifty thousand men who suffered with Theodore.
Salutation to Lavendius and to his companion Banikoros.
And on this day also are commemorated Julian the martyr, and Daniel the monk, the son of
Isaac. [Omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 13
(January 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the miracle which our Lord wrought at the marriage at Cana
of Galilee, even as saith the Holy Gospel; this miracle was the first which the Lord
wrought in Galilee. And by His Divine command He changed water and made it into
sweet wine, and not thin wine, but wine sound and good to the taste, and of pleasant
perfume. To this fact the master of the feast testified, when he called the bridegroom, and
said unto him, “Every man maketh the wine which is good to be drunk first of all, and
when [the priests] have drunk freely, he giveth them wine which is inferior to drink; but
thou hast kept back the good till the last, even unto this moment.” And in that place His
glory appeared, and His disciples believed on Him.
And on this day the Seven Children whose names are ‘Arsalidas, Duamedos (Diomedis),
Eugenius, Demetrius, Bernatius, Stephen and Irakos (Cyriacus); these men were sons of
nobles of the city who were strong in the Faith of Christ. And it was reported unto the
wicked Emperor Decius that they were Christians, and he had them brought to him, and he
pressed them to worship his idols; and when they refused to do so he appointed them a
time wherein they could take counsel together about the matter, and Decius went to his
palace. And these Seven blessed Children went to their houses, and they distributed all
their goods among the poor and needy, and the dinars which were left they took with them
for their necessities, and they [went and] hid themselves in a cave to the east of the city.
And Duameyosis, a young man of wisdom and understanding, used to go on errands for
281

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them in the city, and buy their food for them, and he told them the talk which he heard.
When the Emperor Decius returned to the city he sought the Seven Children, and when the
people told him that they were in a cave, he commanded the soldiers to block up the mouth
of the cave with stones. And when these holy Children fell asleep in the evening God took
their souls and made them to rest in the Garden, and they slept for three hundred and
seventy-two years. And there were two faithful servants of the emperor whose names were
Therodore and Macedonius, and they took two tablets of lead and wrote upon them the
memorial of the saints, and placed them at the mouth of the cave. And after the Emperor
Decius died, many emperors reigned. And in the days of Theodosius, the spiritual
emperor, there rose up certain heretical men who denied the resurrection of the dead. And
there was a certain nobleman whose name was Aldius, and he wanted to build a pen for his
sheep, and he commanded the workmen to bring stones for this purpose. And they opened
the cave, and those saints woke up, and they sent Duamedos (Diomedis) to buy food for
them. And when the men of the city saw that the dinar was inscribed with the name of
Decius, they seized Duamedos (Diomedis), thinking that he had found a buried treasure.
And they brought him before the magistrates and the bishop, and when they examined him
he told them about the young men; and when they had gone there they found them seated
and sending forth rays of light like the sun. And the bishop took the lead tablets and read
their history which was written upon them, and when [the magistrates] heard that they had
fallen asleep in the days of Decius they marveled and glorified God. And they sent a
message to Theodosius the emperor, and when he arrived he saluted the saints, and was
blessed by them. And having conversed with him, and blessed him, they fell asleep on the
ground and delivered up their souls to God; and the Emperor Theodosius wept over them
and buried them in that place. Salutation to the Seven Sleepers.
And on this day also are commemorated Karnos (Carinus) the martyr, and Minas of the
cell (i.e. the anchorite).
And on this day also died Abba Nakaro. This holy man was a spiritual fighter, but no man
knew it. He used to put thorns under his shirt so that he might not sleep soundly, and he
kept vigil by day and by night, and because of his excessive humility they made him a
doorkeeper. And there was in that monastery a certain monk, an anchorite, who was able
to see hidden things by the spirit. One night in his sleep he saw that he was standing on a
high place, and below him was a garden [filled with] fruits of all kinds, and streams of
water ran round about through it, and in the midst of them was Abba Nakaro, watering this
plot and that. And that monk said unto him, “O my brother Nakaro, Unto whom belongeth
this garden?” And Nakaro said unto him, “I planted it.” And the monk said unto Nakaro,
“I wish thee to give me some of the fruits thereof.” Then Nakaro cut off three
pomegranates, and gave them to him, and he tied them up in his garment; and when he
awoke from his sleep he found the fruit. And he went to Abba Nakaro and he found him
standing in the doorway, and he said unto him, “O my brother, hast thou seen me this
[past] night?” And Nakaro said unto him, “Yea, I saw thee, and I gave thee three
pomegranates.” And when the monk went into the monastery he told the monks and the
abbot everything which had happened, and he showed them the pomegranates, and the
brethren marveled at the holiness of Abba Nakaro, for it was then summer time, and not
the season for pomegranates. And the monks were sorry that they had appointed Abba
Nakaro to such a lowly position as that of doorkeeper, and they wanted to give him a
higher position; but when they went to him they could not find him, and they sorrowed for
282

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him with a great sorrow. And the pilgrims told them that he died as on this day. Salutation
to the blessed Abba Nakaro.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 14
(January 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the most excellent Mehrael, the virgin, became a martyr. She was a native of
Tomawiha, and she had God-fearing and Christian parents; her father was a priest and his
name was John, and [the name of] her mother was Hilaria. They had no children, and
because of this were very sad, and they prayed to God, and after they had waited some
days, Hilaria was rewarded with a beautiful daughter, whom she named “Mehrael.” And
when the maiden was twelve years old she began to work many signs and wonders, by the
grace of the Holy Spirit, which dwelt upon her. And then when the wicked Diocletian was
reigning she went out one day to the river bank, and she found a ship and she embarked in
it, and she departed with those who were going to martyrdom. When she arrived at the city
of ‘Ensna (Esnah), they set her before the governor, whose name was Philipianus. And
when he saw her, he had pity on her for her tender body, and he wanted to set her free; but
as soon as she knew that he was going to release her, she cursed him with great boldness,
and reviled his unclean gods. Therefore was the governor wroth, and he commanded her
to be tortured severely. When he could not persuade her to abandon the True Faith, he
commanded the hunters to collect all kinds of serpents, and scorpions, and vipers, and
reptiles which sting, and to throw them into a corn sack and to put the saint into the sack
with them; and the soldiers did so. Thereupon the angel of God appeared, and gave her a
promise; and after this she delivered up her soul, and finished her martyrdom, and received
her heavenly crown. Then they took her out of the corn sack and buried her in that place.
When her father and mother heard of it, they set out with very many natives of their city,
and when they arrived at the place where her body was, they took it up, and made it ready
for burial with great honor, and they built over her a shrine, inside the house, in a secret
place, and many miracles were made manifest there.
And on this day also four and forty soldiers of the company of Saint Cyriacus [and Julitta]
became martyrs. [The Bodleian MS. has five thousand four hundred and thirty-four.]
And on this day also died the holy father and spiritual fighter Archilides. This holy man
was one of the patricians of Rome; the name of his father was John, and that of his mother
Sandalika. And they both were righteous before God, and they walked in the
commandments of God without blemish. And when the days of Saint Archilides were
twelve years, his father died, and his mother wanted to marry him to a wife, but he did not
wish this. And his mother advised him to go to the emperor, so that he might receive the
office which his father had held, and she sent two of his servants with him, and also many
gifts to give to the emperor. And when they were on the sea a mighty storm of wind broke
on them, and the waves rose high, and the ship was broken in pieces, but Saint Archilides
hung on to one of the planks of the ship and it carried him to dry land. And when he was
283

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
going up from the sea he found the dead body of a man which had been cast into the sea,
and he sat down and wept over it and remembered the transience of the world. And he
rebuked his soul, and said unto it, “What have you and I to do with the goods of this
fleeting world? After I am dead I shall return to dust.” And straightway he rose up and
prayed, and entreated the Lord Christ that he might go in the right way, and then he walked
on and arrived at a monastery of the country of Syria, which was built in the name of Saint
Romanus. And he gave to the abbot the two hundred dinars in gold which he had left, and
he begged him to array him in the garb of the monastic life; now the Holy Spirit had told
the abbot about Archilides before his arrival, and when he came he rejoiced in him with a
great joy. And he gathered together all the holy brethren and monks in the church, and the
abbot prayed over Saint Archilides, and he arrayed him in the garb of the monk, and the
brethren rejoiced in him with a great joy, because, manifestly, the grace of God was upon
him. And Saint Archilides, having become a monk, devoted himself to the narrow way,
and he fought a great fight. And he always fasted seven days at a time, and he prayed day
and night, and God gave him the gift of healing the sick; and the people brought unto him
all those that were sick, [and he prayed] over them and healed them. And he made a
covenant with our Lord Christ that he would never look upon the face of a woman. And
being without information concerning him for a period of twelve years, and not knowing
what had become of him, his mother sorrowed for him, and thought that he was dead; and
she mourned for him greatly. And she built a fine house for receiving strangers, and she
added to it a house wherein the pilgrims, and the poor, and the needy, might lodge; and she
herself lived in an upper room of the house for strangers (i.e. her guest house). And one
day she heard certain travelers talking among themselves about the fame of Saint
Archilides, and his holiness, and his spiritual fight, and the grace of God which was upon
him, and they also described his miracles and the beauty of his appearance. And when she
heard them talking, her heart burned like fire, and she knew that they were talking about
her son, and they told her all about him, and she knew that her beloved son was alive. And
she rose up straightway and traveled until she came to the monastery of Saint Romanus,
and she sent a message to her son Archilides and said, “Behold, I have arrived, and I wish
to see thy face; I am thy mother.” And he sent a message unto her, saying, “I have made a
covenant with my Lord Jesus Christ that I will never look upon the face of a woman again,
and I cannot break the covenant which I have made with my Lord Jesus Christ.” Then she
sent a second message unto him wherein she begged and entreated him that she might see
his face, and she said unto him, “If thou dost not show me thy face I will go into the desert,
and the wild beasts shall devour me.” And when Saint Archilides knew that she would not
leave him, and he, on his part, was unable to break his covenant with God, straightway he
prayed to God and asked Him to receive his soul. And he said unto the gatekeeper, “Go to
my mother, and let her come in to me”; now God had accepted his prayer and heard his
petition, and had taken his holy soul. And when his mother came in she found that he had
delivered up his soul, and she cried out with a loud voice and wept; then she asked God to
take her soul, and He heard her petition also and took her soul. And when the monks
wanted to make them ready for burial they tried to separate the body of Saint Archilides
from the body of his mother, but a voice came from the body of Saint Archilides, saying,
“Bury my body with the body of my mother in one grave; I did not give her heart’s desire;
let her see me.” When they heard this voice they marveled exceedingly and glorified God,
and they buried the two of them in one grave. And God made manifest from his body a
great power for the healing of all sick folk.
284

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also Saint ‘Emrais became a martyr. This blessed maiden had honorable
parents who held firmly the Faith of Christ, and she was brought up in the fear of God.
And one day when she was going down to the river to draw water, she saw the bishops,
priests, and deacons who were bound in fetters for Christ’s sake. And she asked the scribe
to write her name down with theirs, and they brought her to Quilquilianus the wicked
governor, and he persuaded her with many words to worship idols. And when she refused
to do so he commanded the soldiers to cut off her head, [and they did so,] and she finished
her martyrdom with all those who were her companions.
And on this day also died Maximus, the brother of Saint Damatheus. And behold we have
written the account of his strife with that of his brother in the section for the seventeenth
day of the month of Ter.
Salutation to the blessed Mehrael who finished her martyrdom in a corn sack; and
salutation to her brother.
Salutation to Archilides who was buried with his mother.
Salutation to ‘Emrais, who left her water-jar, and joined the company of fettered men who
were to become martyrs.
Salutation to Maximus who fought the spiritual fight from his youth up.
Salutation to ‘Abdeyu, the follower of Elijah.
Salutation to the four thousand and thirty and four soldiers who asked that they might be
beheaded outside the city.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 15
(January 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died ‘Abdeyu (Obadiah), the prophet and righteous man. This prophet was the
son of Hananya, and he prophesied in the days of Jehoshaphat. And God spoke by the
voice of this prophet concerning His Resurrection, and concerning the day of retribution,
and what would happen to the children of Israel, and to those who remained among the
Gentiles; and he made strong the people of Israel, and rebuked them often. And he was the
third captain whom Ahab sent with fifty men to summon Elijah to him. Now, fire having
come down from heaven, and burnt up the two captains who preceded him, and the men
who were with them, at the word of Elijah the prophet, when ‘Abdeyu (Obadiah) came to
him he did not behave with arrogance or show himself proud like the two captains who
came before him. But he was humble, and he came to Elijah the prophet, and knelt down
upon his knees before him, and he asked him not to destroy him, like the two captains and
the men who came before him, and those who were with him. And when he said this
Elijah the prophet had compassion upon him, and he came down and went to Ahab with
him. And after Elijah came down and went with him [to Ahab], this just man knew within
himself that the service of Elijah was greater and more honourable than the service of the
kings of the earth, and that the service of Elijah appertained to the service of the King of
285

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
heaven; and he forsook the service of King Ahab and followed Elijah the prophet, and
ministered unto him. And the grace of God descended upon him, and prophecy, and the
power to prophesy; and all the days of his prophesying were twenty years and more, and he
prophesied nine hundred years before the coming of our Lord. And he died in peace and
was buried in the tomb of his fathers in the field which was known as Bet Kherum.
And on this day also the Christians of the country of Syria celebrate the festival of the
death of Saint Gregory. This father Gregory was perfect with his fathers in every virtue,
both of mind and body. He learned all science and doctrine, and he was very wise, and he
was well acquainted with the language and writings of the Greeks, and he was exceedingly
zealous in the True Faith. And all these things being perfect in him, and being of a good
disposition, [the bishops and priests] elected him against his will, and made him Bishop of
the city of Naksesa, which is Daset. And he protected the flock of God over which he was
set, and he illumined their souls and minds with his discourses, and his wise exhortations,
and his rebukes; and he translated (or, interpreted) the Old and New Testaments. And
when the Emperor Theodosius assembled the Council of One Hundred and Fifty Bishops
in the city of Constantinople because of Macedonius, the infidel, who was Archbishop of
the city of Constantinople, this father was one of those who gathered together to the
Council. And he put to shame the infidels Sabellius, and Macedonius, and Apollinarius;
and behold their denial is written in the section for the first day of the month of Yakatit.
And this father destroyed the schism of those infidels, and he cut through with the sword of
his eloquence the devices of the heretics. And he departed in peace with the General
Council, and with those vanquished men and those infidels who had been put to shame.
And he arrived at a good old age and he pleased God and died in peace. And behold, we
have written the rest of his history in the section for the twenty-first day of the month,
which is the day of his death according to the Egyptians.
And on this day also died Peter, and Sophia, and ‘Admira, and Isaac.
And on this day also were martyred Saint Cyriacus and Julitta his mother, and eleven
thousand four hundred and thirty-four men in the days of Alexander, the governor. And
Julitta was a God-fearing woman from her youth, and hearing that a persecution had
broken out, she took to flight through fear of the governor, and she came to the country of
Terses, in Celicia, and she dwelt there. And the governor came into that city seeking for
Christians, and the guards seized her and took her to the governor, and told him that she
was a Christian. And the governor, said unto her, “Offer sacrifice to the gods.” And she
said unto him, “I will not offer sacrifice to unclean gods, but only to my Lord Jesus
Christ.” And the governor said unto her, “O woman, tell me of what nation thou art, and
where thy city is, and what thy name is.” And Saint Julitta said unto him, “As for my
nation (or, people) [my father was] Isawiros, the chief of the people of the city of Nikyos, I
am a rich and noble woman, and my name is ‘Julitta.’ Behold I am in thy power now, but
assuredly I will not sacrifice to unclean [gods].” And the governor said unto her, “Offer
sacrifice so that thou mayest not die under severe torture.” And she said unto him, “If thou
art pleased to do this, send men into the city, and let them search there for a boy three years
old, and let them bring him to thee, and he shall tell us whom we are to serve and
worship.” And the governor sent men to search for a boy three years old, and they found
the boy Cyriacus, who was three years old, less three months. And they took him to the
governor, saying, “We think that this boy will not fail to speak, for his is of Christian
origin.” And when the governor saw that the boy was handsome, and of goodly
286

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
appearance, he said unto him, “O handsome boy, rejoice!” And the boy said unto him,
“Joy is with me, but joy is not with thee. God saith, There is no joy for the wicked.” And
the governor said unto him, “What is thy name? Tell me that thou mayest not die.” And
the boy said unto him, “I am a Christian, and my baptismal name is Cyriacus.” And the
governor said unto him, “Sacrifice to the gods, so that I may honor thee, and give thee
money.” And the boy said unto him, “Get thee far from me, O messenger of Satan, and
enemy of Righteousness.” And when the governor heard this he became exceedingly
angry, and he commanded the soldiers to carry him away and to beat him with fifty stripes;
[and they did so] until his blood flowed like water. And when Saint Julitta saw the
endurance of her son she gave thanks to God. Then the governor commanded them to
bring salt and mustard, and to open the nostrils of the boy and thrust these things into
them. Then the boy cried out and said, “Thy word is sweeter to my throat than honey and
sugar, yea, sweet to my mouth.” And the governor then commanded them to bring
fourteen sharp, red-hot rods, and to thrust seven of them into the body of his mother, and
seven into the body of Cyriacus, two in his ears, two in his eyes, two in his nostrils and one
in his heart; but by the Will of God the fire was extinguished and the rods became like
frozen snow. Then the governor commanded them to shut him up in the prison house and
to be bound with fetters. And as Cyriacus was praying there, Satan came unto him in the
form of an angel to lead him astray; but when the boy made the sign of the Cross over him
Satan disappeared like smoke. Then the governor commanded a blacksmith to make
terrifying instruments of torture wherewith to torture the boy and his mother. When Satan
knew that Cyriacus was eager to receive the crown [of martyrdom], he entered into the
heart of the governor and made him dumb. Then the boy said unto the blacksmith,
“Couldst thou make for me some instruments of torture which are more hurtful than those
wherewith they have been torturing me?” And the blacksmith said unto him, “I can.” And
the boy said, “Make me two knives as sharp as razors, each a cubit long, and make me
instruments to break the head, and twist the neck, and pierce the ears, and [separate] the
members, and scrape the sides; and [make me] a brass crusher, and an instrument for
pulling out the sinews and muscles; and make me three pointed stakes, as long as I am
high, and write on them, saying, ‘The Holy Trinity, which is neither divided nor separated
from those who call upon it.’ And make me an instrument for twisting [the neck], and a
saw, and a frying-pan, and a cauldron, and a wheel, and a roller, and a bender of the neck;
and an iron hook wherewith to draw out what is in the belly. These are the instruments
wherewith I would be tortured.” And when the blacksmith heard these things he marveled,
and was silent, and he and his disciples (i.e. workmen), the blacksmiths of the city,
finished them in forty days (?). And the governor commanded his servants to shave the
head of Cyriacus with a razor, and to pour red-hot coals upon it, and they did so. And they
drove four rods through his shoulders and straight down his body, to the soles of his feet.
And the angel of God came and removed from him the pains of the tortures. And they also
cast him into a [boiling] cauldron and kept him there from dawn to the seventh hour, but
they were unable to cause him pain; and then our Lord appeared unto him, and comforted
him. And the governor said unto the boy, “If thou wouldst perform a miracle take up my
sandal, and make it to live.” And when the boy had prayed, the sandal turned into a great
bull, out of the neck of which went forth a kid, and they killed it, and eleven thousand and
four men ate of it. And the governor was wroth, and he ordered the soldiers to cut out the
boy’s tongue, [and they did so] and brought back to him the tongue. And the governor
commanded them to bring a red-hot cauldron and to cast him into it; and when Julitta saw
this she was afraid. And her son prayed, and God gave him divine power to such a degree
287

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
that she and her son went into it and came out there from alive and uninjured. And the
governor also commanded the soldiers to cast them into a machine, and to drag them about
with ropes so that the flesh might be torn off their bodies, [and they did so], until the angel
of God came and delivered them. And when the governor found that he was unable [to
vanquish] them, he commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads with the sword. And our
Lord Jesus Christ came down from heaven, and said unto the boy, “[Tell me] the things
which ye wish for.” And Cyriacus said unto Him, “Let not my body be buried on earth.
And whosoever shall call upon my name, or celebrate my commemoration, or build a
martyrium for me, or write the book of my strife, or read it, or bring an offering into my
church, or shall pray therein, grant such their desires and forgive them their sins.” And our
Redeemer said unto him, “Everything which thou hast asked of Me I will give thee, and
thou shalt be with Me on My right hand, and I will set thy body in the chariot of Elijah.”
And when the boy heard this he rejoiced greatly, and he gave thanks to God and was
crowned with his mother during the night, and our Redeemer crowned him with
incorruptible crowns, and took his soul up with Him, in glory which is indescribable and
inexplicable. Salutation to Cyriacus.
Salutation to Gregorius who was present at the Council of One Hundred and Fifty Bishops
in Constantinople.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 16
(January 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Philotheus, which name being interpreted is “lover of God,” became a
martyr. This saint was a man of Antioch, and his parents worshipped a bull which was
called “Maraged.” And they fed the bull on fine flour, which was boiled and mixed with
fat, and seed-oil, and the honey of bees, and they anointed him with scented unguents
thrice daily, and gave him wine and seed-oil to drink; and they built one house for him to
live in during the winter and another for the summer. And they placed a collar of gold
round his neck, and rings of gold on his fore legs and hind legs. Now this saint was of
very goodly appearance. And when he was ten years old his parents talked to him, and
told him that he must worship the bull, but he would neither listen to their words nor do
this thing, and because of their love for him, and because they did not wish to annoy him,
they let him alone. Now Saint Philotheus did not know Christ, and he thought that the sun
was God. And he stood up before the sun, saying, “I beseech thee, O sun, if thou art God,
to tell me so”; and a voice came unto him from above, saying, “I am not God, but I am the
servant and messenger of God Whom thou knowest, and thy blood shall be shed for the
Name of God--Glory be to Him!” And when God saw the integrity of heart of the boy
Philotheus, He sent His angel to him at that moment, and the angel informed him about the
mystery of God, and opened his heart so that he might understand what he said unto him;
and when he had told him everything, beginning with the creation of the world, and ending
with the Incarnation of our Lord Christ, the heart of the boy rejoiced and his spirit was
glad. From that day he fasted, and prayed many prayers frequently, and he ate bread and
288

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
salt only, and he gave alms to the poor and needy. And when a year had passed his parents
determined to give a feast to his friends and companions, and they required of their son to
offer incense in honor of the bull, before they ate and drank. And the boy Philotheus stood
up before the bull, and said unto him, “Is it true that thou art a god whom men worship?”
And a voice came forth from the bull which said, “I am not a god, but Satan hath entered
my heart and I have become a deceiver of men.” Then the bull rose up and attacked the
parents of the saint, and he gored them with his horns, and killed them. And the saint
commanded his slaves to kill the bull [and they did so], and they burnt him in the fire, and
scattered [his ashes] to the winds. And the parents of the saint were lying there dead, and
God gave grace to Saint Philotheus, and he prayed over them, and their souls returned to
them, and they rose up straightway and told him how they had seen the punishments which
were [inflicted] in Sheol. And after this Saint Philotheus and his parents were baptized
with Christian baptism in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. And
God gave him grace and power and he healed many sick folk by his prayer. And the report
of him reached Diocletian the emperor, who sent and had him brought to him. And he said
unto Saint Philotheus, “Cast incense to Apollo”; and he promised to give him many things
if he would do so; and the saint rejected his promised things and his words. And the
emperor commanded the soldiers to punish him with every kind of torture, [and they did
so]. They first beat him with whips, and then they laid stones on his belly, and they did
everything they could; but he was strong in the strength of God our Lord Jesus Christ. And
he cursed the infidel emperor, and his unclean gods, until they smote him on the mouth,
and cut out his tongue and broke his teeth; and when they had done all these things to him
he would not hearken to the voice of the emperor. Then the emperor began to persuade
him, and to use words of blandishment and flattery to him, but Saint Philotheus laughed at
him, and promised that he would worship that idol; and the emperor rejoiced at this and
imagined that he would really do so. And he commanded his servants to bring Apollo, and
the men and priests of the idols, and a herald went through the city who cried out, saying,
“Come, O all ye people, so that ye may see Philotheus worshipping Apollo”: and all the
people gathered together about the tribune. And as they were bringing the idols along the
road, Saint Philotheus asked our Lord Christ that the earth might open her mouth, and
swallow up the idols and their priests. And straightway the earth opened her mouth and
swallowed up the idols and their priests, and there was a great outcry round about; and
when the people saw this, many of them believed on our Lord Christ. And the emperor
was wroth, and he commanded the soldiers to cut off the heads of them all with the sword,
[and they did so,] and they received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens, and entered into life everlasting. As for Saint Philotheus, when the emperor was
tired of torturing him he commanded them to cut off his head with the sword, and he
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
And on this day died the holy father Palladius, the fighter. This saint lived for fifty years
in his cell without going outside of it, and he never looked upon the face of a woman. And
the gift of prophecy and the power to work signs and wonders were given unto him in such
a remarkable degree, that his fame was heard all through the country. And there was a
certain merchant in the city of Mesr (Cairo), and he departed to make a journey in a ship,
and the waves rose up and were about to sink the ship. And when hope failed, this
merchant cried out, saying, “I take refuge in the prayer of Abba Palladius; if ever I escape
from this death I will give him one hundred dinars”; and straightway he saw Saint
Palladius steering the ship with his cross, and he brought it into port. And when the
merchant arrived in the city he took one hundred dinars, and hired a horse and set out to go
289

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to Abba Palladius. And when evening fell upon him he arrived at a certain city, and he
took up his abode in the guest house, and he found there a man whose name was Morik,
and he told him everything which was in his heart. And Morik said unto him, “I know his
place, and I will bring thee to him.” And on the following day the two of them set out, and
they came to Abba Palladius, and saluted him, and the merchant gave him the gold which
he had brought with him, and spread it out before him. And Abba Palladius looked at it
and blessed him; and said unto him, “I have no need of this gold. Go and distribute it
among the poor and needy so that thou mayest gain usury from it before God.” When the
merchant heard this he fell down at his feet and begged and entreated him to accept it as a
gift. When Saint Palladius saw that he made most earnest entreaty to him, he took one
dinar, and said unto him, “I will accept this from thee as a blessing; as for the rest, do as I
command thee, and distribute it among the poor.” And having taken the gold the merchant
buried it in the ground. And when he came to the river, Satan entered into the heart of
Morik, and he wanted to take the merchant’s money; and he leaped upon the merchant in
anger and killed him. Then he carried away the dead body by night, and cast it down at the
door of Abba Palladius. And on the following day he went to the governor and told him
about the murder. When the governor came, he bound Abba Palladius in strong fetters,
and he questioned him about the dead man, and Palladius said, “I did not kill him.” And
when they brought him to the coffin containing the body, he took hold of the body and
prayed for a long time, and he said, “I command thee, O dead body, in the Name of God to
rise up and to declare who it was that killed thee.” And the dead man rose up and said that
Morik had killed him for his money. When the governor saw this miracle he bowed down
before Abba Palladius, and he was dismayed because he had entreated him evilly; and
intending to kill Morik he released Palladius. And having fought strenuously Palladius
died at a good old age.
And on this day also fifteen hundred soldiers [or, ten thousand five hundred] and their
three prefects who were companions of Saint Philotheus became martyrs.
And on this day also two thousand and four soldiers [or, ten thousand four hundred] who
were companions of Saint Cyriacus, and his mother Julitta became martyrs.
And on this day also is commemorated the blessed Saint Sahma, one of the Nine Saints,
who fought a good fight, and pleased God.
And on this day also died the holy father, the pure virgin, John, the forty-eighth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This father became a monk in his early years in the
church of Saint Abba Macarius, in the desert of Scete; and he fought a great fight and
devoted himself to fasting, and prayer, and vigil, and God elected him, and the Archbishop
Abba Michael made him a priest in the church of Saint Minas the martyr, and he gave to
him all his money and his land as a gift, and the votive offerings which the people brought
to the church, and he followed peacefully a right course in that church. When Abba Minas,
the archbishop who preceded him, died, the bishops, and priests, and learned men gathered
together in the city of Alexandria to elect an archbishop, and they wrote down on pieces of
paper the names of several men. And a certain righteous man said, “Why did ye make
Saint John administrator of the church of Saint Minas?” And they all said, “Verily he is
worthy of this office.” And one wrote his name on a piece of paper, which was thrust in
among the other pieces of paper, and they laid them on the altar; and they continued in
prayer and the singing of hymns for three days and three nights. And they brought a child
from the church, and he drew a paper from among the papers, and they found that the name
290

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
of this saint was written upon it. Then thy took that paper and thrust it in again among the
other papers, and they brought another child, and he also drew that paper; and when a third
child was brought he drew that same paper, and the name of this saint was found to be
written upon it. Then straightway they knew that God had chosen him for his office, and
they seized him and against his will they made him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria.
And having been appointed he protected his flock, and he read to them frequently the
Books of God, and he confirmed them in the doing of good in the True Faith, and his
charities and alms to all men were very many. In his days a great famine took place in the
land of Egypt, and they sold one measure of grain for two dinars in gold, and each day
many poor folk of every nationality gathered together at the door of his house, asking for
food. And he put his disciple Mark in charge of the money of the church, and he gave to
all the poor what they needed both morning and evening, until God removed His wrath
from men. And this father built many churches, and adorned them with suitable
adornments. And because of the numerous works of charity which he carried out, and his
alms and his gifts, this father was called “John the Merciful.” and indeed he was merciful
to the poor, and the wretched, and the widows and the orphans. When the day of his death
drew nigh, he told the priests the day whereon he would die. And he said unto them, “I
was born on the sixteenth of Ter, and I was named archbishop on that day, and on that day
I shall die”; and when he told the bishops this they wept, and they said unto him, “Our
father, who will be appointed archbishop over us after thee?” And he said unto them,
“Mark the priest, my servant, for our Lord Jesus Christ hath elected him to this office.”
And on the sixteenth day of the month of Ter this father died, having sat as archbishop for
twenty-three years. In his days died David who had been made Archbishop of the city of
Antioch by force, and his predecessor George, having passed ten years in prison, was
appointed. When this father was appointed Abba John wrote to him an Epistle on the True
Faith, and when Abba George died a certain just man whose name was Yarikos was
appointed in his stead. And he wrote a letter and sent it to Abba John, who received him in
the Holy Spirit, and rejoiced in his letter, and sent to him an answer to the same.
And on this day also died Mar Daniel, the Syrian, of the city of ‘Amed. The father of this
saint was rich in gold and silver, and when his father died Abba Dionysius, Bishop of the
city of ‘Amed, brought him up, and taught him the Books of the Church, and then made
him a deacon and priest, and arrayed him in the garb of the monastic life. And Mar Daniel
continued in fasting and prayer, and he never ate food between one Sabbath and the next,
and at length the gift of healing was bestowed upon him; and he made a vow to himself
that he would never look upon a woman. When his mother heard of the report of him she
came to him, and wished to see him, and when she sent a message to him he said unto her,
“I have made a vow that I will never look upon a woman.” And she said unto him, “I am
thy mother. Why dost thou treat me like other women?” When he refused [to see] her, she
pulled off her veil and cursed him, saying, “God maketh me to see thee laughing, and two
women wrapped up in a single garment shall look upon thee.” After a few days a certain
man took three hundred dinars of gold to give them to Mar Daniel, and in the evening,
when he arrived at the gate of the cell of the saint, his companion rose up against him, and
slew him through his love of money. When the King of ‘Amed heard the story about a
dead man being found at the door of Mar Daniel, he commanded [his soldiers] to bring the
saint before him. And when the women who were bathing in the bath-house heard the
story about Mar Daniel, two of them rushed out to see him, and because of their great haste
they had only a single garment to cover them both. And Abba Daniel laughed when he
knew that his mother’s curse had come upon him. When the king questioned him about
291

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the dead man Saint Daniel said unto him, “I did not kill him”; and through the prayer of
Abba Daniel the dead man rose up and declared who had killed him. When the king and
all the people saw this, they worshipped the God of Saint Daniel and they killed the
murderer. Then the king gave unto Abba Daniel much money, and when he refused to
accept it he built a monastery for him, and many monks gathered together therein. And
then growing old and fighting strenuously, he became a little sick, and he died in peace.
Salutation to Daniel who vowed that he would never look upon a woman.
Salutation to Julitta, the mother of Cyriacus. Salutation to the five thousand martyrs who
suffered with Cyriacus.
Salutation to Philotheus. Salutation to the fifteen hundred soldiers and their three prefects,
the companions of Philotheus, who suffered martyrdom.
Salutation to Palladius, and two-fold salutation to his disciple Theophilus.
Salutation to John, the revealer of mysteries.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 17
(January 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day are commemorated the honourable Saints Maximus and Dumatheus, his
brother, the sons of Lavendius, who was King of the country of Rome. And this king held
the True Faith, and feared God, and he executed righteousness and judgement; and because
of this God gave him these two saints, and from their youth up, by reason of their purity,
and their humility, and their fear of God, they were like unto the angels of God. And they
prayed and read the Books of the Old and New Testaments by night and by day. And they
decided in their minds to reject this world, and to assume the garb of the angels, that is to
say the garb of the monastic life. And they worked upon their father to allow them to go to
the city of Nicea to pray in the place, wherein the Three Hundred and Eighteen Bishops
who formed the Council assembled; and when they told him he rejoiced greatly, and sent
them away with slaves and soldiers. And when they arrived in the city of Nicea, and had
received a blessing in the holy place, they sent back the soldiers to their father, and they
sent with them letters to him wherein they said, “O our lord the king, we wish to dwell
here for a few days.” Then they opened their minds, and held converse with a holy and
righteous monk, and they said unto him, “We wish to assume the monastic garb under thy
direction.” And he said unto the, “I am afraid of the emperor your father. But go ye to the
country of Syria, for there liveth there a righteous monk, a priest of the True Faith, whose
name is ‘Agabius.” Having said these things unto them they accepted the counsel of that
monk, and they departed to the country of Syria. And they came to Saint ‘Agabius, and
revealed to him their minds, and he arrayed them in the garb of the monastic life, and they
lived with him until he died. Before his death he spoke unto them, and told them that he
had seen a vision wherein Saint Abba Macarius the Great came to him, and said unto him,
“Command these two young men Maximus and Dumatheus to come to me in the desert of
292

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Scete, and they shall be my sons before thy death.” And Abba ‘Agabius told them what he
had seen, and he said unto them, “O my sons, I have long had the desire to see this father
Macarius in the flesh, and behold, I have seen him in the spirit.” And he said, “After my
death go ye to him.” And when he was dead they dwelt in the land of Syria, and God gave
unto them the gift of healing the sick. And the report of them was heard in all countries
through the merchants who traveled by sea and by land. And the saints learned to make
the roofs (i.e. awnings) of ships, and they lived upon a small part of what they earned by
the labor of their hands, and the rest they gave away to the poor and the needy. And by
reason of the multitude of the signs and wonders which God performed by their hands,
many of those who were possessed by many [evil] spirits, were cured immediately they
heard the names of Saints Maximus and Dumatheus, by the might of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And there was a very large snake which lived near the high road, and it destroyed
very many men, and some of the men of the city came to Saints Maximus and Dumatheus,
and asked them to deliver them from that venomous serpent. And Abba Maximus took a
sheet of paper and wrote upon it as follows: “In the Name of Jesus Christ, our Lord, the
Word of the Father, God of hosts, the God of Abba Macarius, the blessed, and our
honourable father ‘Agabius, who was indued with the Spirit, the holy priest, when this
paper cometh to the door of thy cave, thou shalt go forth and shalt die, and the fowls of
heaven shall devour thee.” And a certain man took that paper and laid it at the door of the
den of that serpent, and straightway it came forth and died; and all the people marveled
exceedingly and they glorified God. And God performed very many signs and wonders by
the hands of Maximus and Dumatheus. One day a certain nobleman went out to his father,
who was near the sea-shore, and looking up at the awning of one of the ships, he saw
written thereon the names of Maximus and Dumatheus, and he asked the captain of the
ship, saying, “What are these names?” And the captain answered and said unto him,
“These are [the name of] two holy monks and brothers, and because of my confidence in
them I have written their names upon the awning of my ship, so that God may save me
from sinking in the sea through their prayers.” And the nobleman said unto him, “What
are they like in person?” And the captain said unto him, “One is perfect, and the other hath
no beard”; and then the nobleman knew that the young men were the sons of the emperor.
And he took that merchant and brought him to the emperor, the father of the saints, and he
asked him about his sons; and the captain told them what they were like, and everyone
knew that they were indeed his sons. And he sent their mother and their sister to them, and
when they came to them, with many soldiers, and saw them, they cried out and wept freely
and embraced them; and their mother asked them to come to her and to their father the
emperor. And they said unto her, “We cannot destroy [our] covenant with God, for we
have vowed ourselves to God, and we pray for thee and for our father, by night and by day,
that God will deliver you from all harm.” And with these words they consoled her, and she
left them and returned sad and sorrowful, and she wept because she was to be separated
from them; and she told the emperor and the soldiers what had happened to them. And the
emperor said unto his wife and his soldiers, “Let them alone so that they may become
treasure with our God and Lord Jesus Christ, and may make entreaty to Him for us in their
prayers; for everything which is in this world, and the glory thereof, passeth away like a
dream, and they will gain a kingdom which doth not pass away.” And in those days the
Archbishop of the city of Rome died, and the bishops and all the priests gathered together
so that they might take counsel and appoint an archbishop. And they remembered the
blessed Maximus, and they said, “Verily this man is well fitted for this office, for God hath
given unto him the great gift of healing the sick, and God hath wrought many signs and
293

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
wonders by his hands. And although he is young in days, still Christ dwelleth in him, and
he is perfect in knowledge and in good works, and in all the Law of the Church.” When
his father and mother heard this they rejoiced exceedingly, and they sent certain officers
together with their troops, and they sent with them a letter which they had written to the
governor of the country of Syria commanding him to send Maximus and Dumatheus to the
city of Rome. When the saints heard this they were exceedingly sorry, and they
remembered what their father, the monk Abba ‘Agabius, had commanded them. And they
rose up straightway, and they changed their apparel, and they departed, not knowing where
they were going, and they wandered to the shore of the Red Sea. And being athirst God
changed that bitter water and made it sweet for them, and He sent forth power from Him,
and it carried them from the country of Syria and brought them to the desert of Scete; and
they came to Saint Abba Macarius, and told him that they wished to dwell with him. And
when he saw that they were sons of grace, he thought that they would not be able to live in
the desert, and he told them about the difficulty of the desert, saying, “Ye will not be able
to dwell here.” And they answered and said unto him, “O our father, if we cannot live here
we will go away.” Then he taught them how to plait palm fiber, and he showed them a
valley wherefrom they could obtain the palm leaves, and he helped them until they had
built a cell for themselves. And he brought to them a certain native to buy from them the
objects which they made with their hands, and he brought them bread. And they lived in
this way in the desert for three years, and they held converse with none, for they would go
into the church holding their peace, and received the Holy Mysteries, and return to their
cell. And our father Saint Macarius wondered at their behavior and why they had neither
come to him nor visited him during this period of three years; and he asked God to reveal
the matter of them to him. And he rose up and went to them, and they rejoiced in him
exceedingly, and he dwelt with them that night. And when he rose up to pray he saw
Saints Maximus and Dumatheus rise up to pray, and when they prayed he saw as it were a
rope of fire which went up from their mouths to heaven. And Satans thronged about them
like flies, and the angel of God drove them away from them with a sword of fire. When
the morning had come he arrayed them in the garb of the angels, and he departed from
them, saying, “Pray for me”; and they bowed low before him, saying, “Bless us, O our
father, and pray for us.” And when they had finished their fight, and God wished to give
them rest from the labor and sorrow of this world, Maximus fell sick of fever and his body
became like fire. And he sent a message to Abba Macarius asking him to come and see
him, and when Macarius arrived he found him sick. And Maximus said unto him, “Bless
me, O my father”; and he blessed him, and said unto him, “Fear not, for this illness shall
depart from thee.” And Maximus said unto him, “O my father, I know that this day I shall
depart from this poor body of mine; I ask thee to pray for me, and I shall find help”; and
having said these words he wept bitterly. And at that moment Abba Macarius saw the
Company of the Saints, Prophets and Apostles, and John the Baptist, and the Emperor
Constantine, and they came and surrounded Saint Maximus, until his soul went forth in
honor and glory. And Abba Macarius wept and said, “Blessed art thou, Maximus.” And
Dumatheus wept bitterly for his brother, and he asked Abba Macarius, saying, “Pray for
me that God may take my soul and bring me to my brother.” And three days after Saint
Maximus was buried, Dumatheus fell sick, and one told Saint Macarius about him, and he
rose up to go to him. And as he was journeying along the road, he saw the saints, and he
saw the Company, who came and received the soul of Saint Maximus, take the soul of his
brother Dumatheus, and carry it up to heaven. And when Abba Macarius arrived at their
cell he found Dumatheus dead, and he took him and buried him with his brother Maximus,
294

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
in the same grave. The death of Maximus took place on the fourteenth day of the month of
Ter, and that of his brother on the sixteenth day of the month of Ter. And Saint Abba
Macarius commanded that monastery to be called by their names, and similarly that
monastery is called to this day Dabra Barmos (Baramas). And they have everlasting
remembrance in the kingdom of heaven, and in all the ends of the world. Salutation to
Dumatheus and his brother Maximus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 18
(January 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the burning of the bones of the blessed Saint George (Gregory), the
fighter, and chief of the martyrs.
And on this day also died the holy father, the fighter and ascetic, Abba Jacob, Bishop of
the city of Nisibis, the teacher of Saint Ephraim. The saint and fighter was born and
brought up in the city of Nisibis, and he was a Syrian; from his early years he adopted the
garb of the monastic life. He wore sackcloth made of hair, and he fought the fight by night
and by day, with fasting, and prayer, and prostrations, and vigils, and the heat of summer,
and the cold of winter, and he never took off his apparel of hairy sackcloth. His food was
the herbs of the earth, and his drink was rain-water only, and for this reason his body
shone, and his soul sent forth much light, and God gave him the gift of prophecy, and the
power to work signs and miracles. And he used to tell people what was going to happen
before it happened, and this power he possessed to a remarkable degree. One day he saw a
number of women laughing and playing together in a lewd manner by a fountain of water,
and he dried up the fountain of water and made the hair of their heads turn white. And
having repented and made entreaty to him, and bowed low before him, they begged him to
restore to them that fountain of water, and he restored it to its former state; but the hair of
their heads remained white, so that they might be patient and not magnify themselves [in
future]. One day whilst he was journeying along the road he found a number of men who
were laying out and covering for burial a man who was not dead, and they asked the saint
to give them cloths wherewith to swathe him, but the saint by his prayer made the dying
man to live. When the men came back and found the dead man [alive], they entreated him,
and repented, and he healed them. And the virtues and the righteousness of this saint
becoming known, the priests chose him to be Bishop of the city of Nisibis. And having
been appointed he protected the flock of the Lord Christ, and he ruled them well, and he
guarded them well against the Arian wolves. When the Emperor Constantine gathered
together the Council of the Saints in the city of Nicea this father was with them, and he
excommunicated Arius and drove him out of the church; and he drew up the Prayer of the
True and Holy Faith with the holy Fathers, and it is the Sign to all believers and Christian
people. And he raised a man from the dead at the coming of the Emperor Constantine,
even as the Book of the Council testifieth. And when the King of Persia came to the city
of Nisibis and attacked it, this holy man brought a dense and smoky cloud over their horses
and buffaloes, and it caused them pain, and they backed and broke the ropes which held
295

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them, and stampeded. When the King of Persia saw this he was afraid with a great fear,
and he rose up and fled and departed as far away as possible from the city of Nisibis. And
this saint having finished his strife, and illumined his own soul, and the souls of his flock,
he died in peace, and went to God Whom he loved, and inherited everlasting life.
Salutation to Jacob of Nisibis.
Salutation to the burning of the bones of Saint George (Gregory).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 19
(January 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day were found the bodies of the saints Abba Behura and Abba Basora, his brother,
and ‘Enira their mother. These saints and fighters were man of the city of Sobes, ad they
became martyrs in the days when idols were worshipped, and their bodies were laid in the
church of the city of Sobes. In the nine hundred and thirty-seventh year of the pure
martyrs (A.D. 1221), in that year [I say], Frankish soldiers attacked the country of Egypt,
and they captured the city of Damietta, and ruled there. And they also captured many of
the large cities, which were round about Damietta. And King Komel (Kamil), that is to
say, the King of Egypt, gathered together very many soldiers from all the land of Egypt,
and he went forth to fight against the Frankish soldiers, and as they marched they
destroyed many churches. Among such churches was a church of the city of Sobes,
wherein were the bodies of the holy martyrs. And one of his soldiers took the coffer
wherein where the bodies of the saints, and he opened it thinking that he should find
therein money of this world wherewith to enjoy himself. And he found precious pearlstones of great price, that is to say, the bones of the holy martyrs, but he did not know their
value, and he scattered them by the walls of the church, and carried away the coffer, which
had contained their bodies and sold it. And God, the Most High, Who is patient and most
merciful, forbore with that man until he came to the Frankish army. And the Franks and
Egyptians fought and that man was killed at the very beginning of the fight, according to
the testimony of his companions who were looking at him when he was killed, and who on
their return to their country proclaimed the glory of God, and declared and spoke to every
man, saying, “This man was the first to be killed. A sword pierced his neck and cut off his
head, and destroyed its sides and he died an evil death.” Now when that man cast away the
bones of the saints there was a certain believing woman, the wife of a priest, who stood
watching him, and straightway she gathered them up and rolled them in her head-cloth
with joy. And because of her fear of the Muslims, she went into the church, and laid them
down in a corner of the church, tied up in her head-cloth, and she covered them over with
tiles; and they remained covered over with the tiles in the corner of the church for a period
of twenty years, and the woman forgot their history. And God having willed to reveal
them for the benefit of the Christian people, two men mentioned them before the woman,
and the woman remembered them, and straightway she told the priests and the believing
folk about the place where the bones were. And the priests went into the church, and they
took the bodies (sic) of the holy martyrs, and bore them with great honor, and they made a
296

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
beautiful coffer for them, and laid them in it; and they made a great festival, with prayers
and psalms, and hymns, as it might be at this day, and they laid them in the church. And
Abba Gabriel, Bishop of this city, commanded the people to make a festival for them, and
to hold this day in honor, and to write their names down in each Egyptian city for the
festival; and they did as the bishop commanded. And many signs and miracles appeared
through these bones, among them being the following: There was a certain woman who
had a blind daughter, and she had lost all hope of her daughter ever being able to see; and
the blessed woman prayed to the bones of the saints, and straightway her daughter
rejoiced, and she was able to see with her eyes as well as formerly. And she glorified our
Lord Jesus Christ Who honored the martyrs with so great honor. Salutation to the woman
who found the bodies (sic) of the martyrs.
Salutation to Abba Yafkerna ‘Egzi’E, who finished his fight.
Salutation to the consecration of your church, [O Abba Behura and Abba Basora].
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 20
(January 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint ‘Abrokoros (Prochorus) the Apostle, whom the Lord chose to be of
the number of the Seventy-two Apostles, whom our Lord chose and sent forth to preach,
and to whom He gave power to heal the sick and to cast out devils. This saint was with the
Apostles in the upper room of Zion, and was filled with the gift of the Holy Spirit
Paraclete. And he it was whom the Apostles chose to be among the number of the Seven
Deacons concerning whom the Book of the Acts of the Apostles testifieth that they were
filled with the Holy Spirit and wisdom. And he was the disciple of Saint John the
evangelist, the apostle who proclaimed the Godhead, and he went with him to many cities,
and Saint John laid his hand upon him and appointed him Bishop of the city of Nicomedia,
of the country of Betania (Bithynia). And he preached the Faith of our Lord Christ therein,
and he converted many of the Greeks and those who worshipped idols, and he brought
them into the True Faith, and baptized them in the Name of the Father and the Son and the
Holy Ghost, and taught them to keep the commandments of the Holy Gospel. And he built
a fine church for them in that city, and appointed priests and deacons for them, and then he
went out to the cities which were round about that city, and preached in them the preaching
of the Holy Gospel and baptized many of the people. And he taught even many Jews, and
turned them from their error, and baptized them with Christian baptism; and great
tribulation came [upon him] and persecution for the Name of Christ. And having finished
his fight he died at a good old age, and he pleased God and inherited the kingdom of
heaven and everlasting joy.
And on this day ‘Aklog (Eclogius) the priest became a martyr. This saint was a man of the
city called “El-Neft,” in the country of Egypt, and his father’s name was Dioscorus, and
his mother’s name was Euphemia; they belonged to a noble family and were very rich in
gold, and silver, and cattle, and sheep, and horses, and camels, and lands. And they had no
297

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
son, and were therefore very sad, and they prayed to God continually to give them a son;
and God heard their prayer and gave them this holy son, and they called him “’Aklog”
(Eclogius), which is, being interpreted, “pleasant to God.” When he was eight years old
his parents gave him to a teacher so that he might instruct him in the Law of God, and each
day he went to the church, and heard the praises and prayers before he went to his teacher.
One day he left is teacher to ride his horse, and two servants followed him. As he was
riding along he saw many men and women gathered together, and uttering cries, and he
went up to them to see [what the matter was], and he found that a child whom a serpent
had bitten had fallen down in their midst, and was night unto death. And Abba ‘Aklog
(Eclogius) cried out, and he remembered the words of the Holy Gospel which said that
those who believed on our Lord should make miracles manifest, that they should cast out
devils in His Name, that they should take up vipers in their hands and that they should not
harm them in any way, and that they should lay their hands on the sick and heal them. And
straightway he took hold of the child’s hands, and made over him the sign of the Cross in
the Name of the Father and the Son [and the Holy Spirit], and said, “O child, I tell thee to
be healed of the bite of this wicked, lying reptile. For our Lord saith with His pure and
righteous mouth, ‘Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents and scorpions,
and every power of the Enemy, and they shall in no wise injure you.’” And straightway
the child recovered and became like one on whom no evil whatsoever had come. When
the people saw this miracle they marveled exceedingly, and they praised God, the Worker
of miracles, by His saints; and the report of this miracle was heard in every city. And
when Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius) had arrived at his twelfth year and was still under his
teacher’s care, he knew by heart the Four Gospels, and the Fourteen Epistles of Paul, and
the Seven Apostolic Epistles, and the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, and the One
Hundred and Fifty Psalms of David. And he read each of these every night of the First
Day of the week, and he devoted himself strenuously to fasting and prayer. When the men
of his city saw his spiritual fight, after his parents’ death, they asked the bishop to appoint
him their priest so that he might pray for them. He fasted two, or three, or seven days at a
time, all the days of his life; and he prayed day and night; and he wore hairy sackcloth
under his apparel next to his flesh. And the grace of God called the blessed ‘Aklog
(Eclogius) to be a priest. And the bishop seized him against his will, and made him a
priest. And when he was being appointed the people heard a voice crying out and saying,
“Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius) is worthy, is worthy, is worthy of the office of the priesthood”;
and the people glorified God. And after those days a great persecution of the Christians
broke out in all the land of Egypt under Diocletian the infidel, who destroyed the churches;
and many people became martyrs. And God summoned Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius) to
become a martyr, and he stood up and looked up into heaven, and cried out, saying, “My
Lord, and my God, and my Redeemer, Jesus Christ, the Sustainer of the Universe, let Thy
mercy and peace be over the people who are in my city everywhere, and bless them and
deliver them from Satans, and send an angel unto me to strengthen me until I have finished
my fight for Thy Name’s sake; for Thine is the glory and the power for ever and ever,
Amen.” When Saint ‘Aklog (Eclogius) had said this he turned to the people who were
round about him, and said unto them, “Whosoever loveth [me] let him come and go with
me”; and there followed him his own family, and slaves, and people of the city, three
hundred and forty men; and they stood upon a high place and they cried out loudly and
boldly, saying, “We are Christians.” When the captain of the emperor’s soldiers heard this
he was sorry, and he bound Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius) in fetters and sent him to Arianus the
governor. And Arianus said unto him, “Worship the gods of the emperor so that thou
298

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
mayest received great honor”; and ‘Aklog (Eclogius) said unto him, “I will never worship
unclean idols, and I will only worship my Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom belongeth glory,
and power, and majesty.” When Arianus heard this he condemned Saint Abba ‘Aklog
(Eclogius) to severe torture in a red-hot oven, but God sent His angel and made the fire [as
cool] as dew; and the saint stood up in the red-hot oven and prayed. Then Arianus the
governor said unto the hundred and forty men, “Come ye and worship the gods.” And they
answered and said unto him, “We will not worship the gods, but only Jesus Christ.” And
Arianus commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads with the sword, and they did so, and
the saints received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And in those
days the son of Arianus the governor died, and he mourned for him greatly. And Abba
‘Aklog (Eclogius) said unto him, “If I do good for thee, and pray to the Lord my God on
thy behalf that He may raise up thy son alive, what honor wilt thou bestow upon me?”
And Arianus said unto him, “I will make thee captain over one hundred soldiers, and I will
send thee to thy city with great honor.” And Saint Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius) said unto him,
“I do not wish for this thing, but I want thee, when thou hast tortured me, to send my body
to my city; if thou wilt do this for me I will raise up thy son for thee.” And the governor
swore to him that he would do all that he wished. And Saint ‘Aklog (Eclogius) prayed
unto God, saying, “I beseech Thee, O my Lord Jesus Christ, to hear my petition this day,
and to raise up this boy from the dead, that he may glorify Thy Name for ever and ever,
Amen.” And having said this, he made the sign of the Cross over him in the Name of the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and straightway the child rose up alive. And when
the people saw this they all cried out together, saying, “We are all Christians, and we
believe in the God of Saint Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius).” When the governor heard this he
was exceedingly wroth, and he commanded the soldiers to take them outside the city, and
to dig a large pit, and to light a large fire therein, and when the flames reached to a great
height, to cast them into it; and the soldiers did so, and the men finished their martyrdom in
the peace of God. Now they were in number eight hundred and nine souls. And Arianus
the governor commanded the soldiers to torture Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius) severely, and to
send to his own country his head [after it was cut off with] the sword. When the saint
heard this he rejoiced greatly, and he stood up and prayed, saying, “How [long], O my
Lord Jesus Christ, wilt Thou hearken unto the petition of me, Thy servant? Let Thy mercy
come upon my city, and upon all the men who dwell therein. Bless the work of their
hands, and bless their women, and their children, and their cattle, and their fields, and
deliver them from all trials and tribulations, by Thy Divine Power, O my Lord Jesus
Christ. Give Thou grace to my body, and grant that every sick person who shall come to
my church, and shall intercede before my body in Thy Name shall be healed of his
sickness. And he who writeth the book of my strife and celebrateth my commemoration,
do Thou write his name in the Book of Life. When a man giveth an offering on the day of
my commemoration, or incense, or unguent, or oil, or wine, give Thou him his reward in
the kingdom of the heavens. Whosoever shall swathe my body for burial in clean cloth, do
Thou array him in the apparel of light, for Thine is the glory and the power for ever and
ever, Amen.” And when he had said this, behold our Lord appeared unto him and said
unto him, “Peace be unto thee, O my elect and beloved, and beloved of the Father and of
the Holy Spirit, Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius), I have come unto thee, and I will give thee the
reward of thy labor, and I will make thee to rest in My kingdom. Three crowns have been
prepared for thee: one for thy virginity, one for thy torture, and one because thou hast
rejected the world for My Name’s sake. Come unto Me, O My beloved Abba ‘Aklog
(Eclogius), so that I may give thee the reward of thy labor, and that I may take thee up into
299

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
My kingdom, and that I may do for thee everything which thou hast asked of Me this day,
in return for what they have made thee to suffer for My Name’s sake. I will give thee an
abode in the kingdom of the heavens. I will make the angel hosts to serve thee, and thou
shalt rejoice with all the saints at My table in the life, which is forever. Verily I say unto
thee, O My chosen one Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius), whosoever shall make intercession by thy
body, and shall seek for thine intercession because of the labor which thou hast performed
for My sake, if he be in tribulation, or in sickness, or in any trial and sorrow, I will deliver
him. And whosoever shall call his son by thy name, that child will I bless, and rear
happily, and preserve from evil. Whosoever shall give an offering to the church on the day
of thy commemoration in thy name, to him will I bring the Bread of Life in the kingdom of
the heavens. Whosoever shall give a cup of cold water to a thirsty man, him will I make to
drink from the cup of the Water of Life. Whosoever shall plant a vineyard or sow fields
with grain, and pray to Me for them in thy name, I will make him grow old, and multiply
him, and bless him.” And when our Lord Christ had finished His converse with the
blessed Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius), He made the sign of the Cross over his body, and
delivered it from all his toil, and He embraced him, and blessed him, and went up into
heaven in great glory, whilst the saint was looking at Him. After this the saint turned to the
soldiers, and said unto them, “O my brethren, finish that which the governor hath
commanded you to do.” And the soldiers, seeing that his face was shining like the sun,
feared greatly his majesty and his light, and they were unable to approach him. But one of
them, a man dense of heart and unmerciful, stretched out his hand to the saint, and smote
him on the neck with the sword and cut off his holy head; and the saint finished his
martyrdom on the twentieth day of the month of Ter. And the angels took his soul and
carried it up into heaven singing as they went. And the soldiers left the body of the saint
on the riverbank, and they embarked in their ship and departed. And certain young men
were there, and they went into the city and told the people why, and how, the martyrdom
of Saint Abba ‘Aklog (Eclogius) took place. And the people and the priests gathered
together, and went and carried his body, with great honor and with singing of psalms and
dirges, until they brought it to the city and laid it in a good resting place. And great signs,
and miracles, and healings of the sick took place through it.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Behnu, the martyr; and the consecration of
the church of John, the possessor of the Golden Gospel, in the city of Rome, and the
translation of his body thereto. Salutation to John.
And on this day the strife and martyrdom of Abba Noha (Noah) took place, and the
manifestation of his miracles. And on this day also are celebrated the consecration of the
church of Mar Mehnam, and also ‘Alvanus (Silvanus), and Abba Nabyud (or Nabdeyu) of
Sihat (Scete), and Anna Benwah, the martyr.
Salutation to ‘Abrokoros (Prochorus).
Salutation to Abba Kaluz, the martyr, of the city of Fant.
Salutation to Abba Nabyud.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

300

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TIR 21
(January 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the assumption of the body of our pure, and holy, and honorable
Lady, the Virgin Mariyam, the God-bearer, who is indeed the Lady of all the women of
this world. And our Lady prayed continually at the holy grave of our Lord Christ; the
Holy Spirit made known to her that she was to depart from this fleeting world, and then
told the virgins who were with her from Dabra Zayt, even as our Lord told them. Then our
Lady Mary prayed, saying, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, hearken Thou unto me, and unto my
prayer at this time, and unto my petition, and bring unto me thy disciple, John the
evangelist, and likewise all Thy disciples, both those who are living and those whose souls
Thou hast taken, for Thou art the God of the living and of the dead, and unto Thee
belongeth glory for ever and ever, Amen.” and behold a cloud straightway took up John in
the spirit from the city of Ephesus, and brought him to our Lady the holy Virgin Mariyam;
and when he stood before her she glorified our Lord Jesus Christ. And John said unto her,
“Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace, who didst bear our Lord Jesus Christ.” And the
Holy Spirit spoke by his mouth, saying, “Thou shalt go forth from this world with great
honor and glory, and after many great signs and wonders which our Lord and God shall
make manifest by thee.” When our holy Lady the Virgin Mariyam heard these words, she
rejoiced exceedingly, and she prayed, saying, “Glory unto Thee, O my Lord and God Jesus
Christ, Who hast granted unto me what I asked. And now, honor me by Thy coming with
Thine angels, so that they may take my soul and bear it up with Thee into the heavens.”
And straightway the voice of the Holy Spirit from heaven was heard, saying, “At this time
all the angels shall come from heaven, and the Apostles from all the ends of the earth,
riding upon the clouds, and they shall come to Bethlehem, for the sake of the holy and
blessed Virgin Mariyam, the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ.” And straightway all the
Apostles came, for those who were dead rose up from their graves, and they stood before
our holy Lady the Virgin Mariyam, and said unto her, “Rejoice, O thou who art full of
grace, for our God was born of thee. He shall take thee out of this fleeting world with
great glory even as He promised thee.” And straightway our Lady Mariyam sat down
upon her bed, and said unto the Apostles, “Now do I know that my God and your God,
Jesus Christ, will come to me, and that I shall see Him as I see you, and then I shall depart
from this world. And now I desire you to tell me whence ye knew that I was to depart
from this world, and so hastened your coming to me.” And Peter and all the Apostles said
unto her, “The Holy Spirit commanded us to come unto thee, and straightway we mounted
upon a cloud of light, and we arrived where thou art in the twinkling of an eye.” When our
Lady Mariyam heard this from the Apostles, she lifted up her voice and said, “I praise and
hymn Thy Holy Name, O my Lord Jesus Christ, my God, because Thou hast seen my
suffering, and hast revealed unto me wonders, for Thou art Almighty; henceforth all
generations shall hold me blessed.” And when the Virgin had finished her prayer and
supplications, she said unto the Apostles, “Bring me incense and a censer, and summon our
Lord Jesus,” and they did as she commanded them; and straightway our Lord Jesus Christ
came. And thousands of thousands, and tens of thousands of tens of thousands of angels,
surrounded Him, and archangels, and our Lord Jesus Christ comforted her, and told her of
the rest and joy which were prepared for her. At that moment many miracles took place;
the blind received their sight, and the dumb spoke, and the lame stood up straight and
301

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
walked, and the lepers were cleansed, and from those who were possessed of devils the
evil spirits went forth quickly. And all those who were suffering from sicknesses of divers
kinds, as soon as ever they came to the place where was our holy Lady the Virgin
Mariyam, were healed straightway of their sicknesses, no matter of whatever kinds they
were. Then our holy Lady the Virgin Mariyam said unto her beloved Son, “O my Lord
Jesus Christ, I am afraid of the awful and terrifying angels who are in the air of the Land of
Fire.” And our Lord said unto her, “Which of them can have dominion over thee?” When
the time for her to depart from her body drew nigh, the Apostles and the virgins who were
there weeping asked her to bless them, and she laid her hands upon them, and blessed
them. And straightway our Lord Christ took her pure soul in His Divine Hands, and He
wrapped it up in a cloth of light, and took it up with Him to the habitation above. And her
Son, our Lord, commanded the Apostles to bury her body in a fitting manner, and they
carried it to Gethsemane. And before her soul departed, our Lady looked and saw a great
light, which it is impossible for the tongue of man to describe. And our Lord Christ said
unto her, “Henceforth thy body shall depart to the Garden of Delight, and thy soul shall
dwell in the abode of joy, wherein the angels shall praise [God] before thee.” And our
Lady said unto Him, “I beseech Thee, in the operation of Thy wisdom, to hearken unto my
petition. Whosoever shall pray unto Thee in my name do Thou in Thy mercy receive his
petition. Whosoever is in tribulation and shall pray to Thee in my name, deliver Thou him
from all his tribulation, for Thou art Almighty in heaven and on earth. Bless everywhere
those who shall celebrate the commemoration of my name, and accept the offerings of all
those who shall offer gifts in my name.” And our Lord Jesus answered and said unto her,
“Behold, I have done for thee all which thou didst ask of Me. Rejoice, for every gift and
every honor I will give thee from my holy Father. And everyone who shall pray unto Me
in thy name henceforward shall never perish, neither in this world nor in that which is to
come, for I will be to him a kindly intercessor with My heavenly Father.” After our holy
Lady the Virgin Mariyam was dead the Apostles prepared her for burial, and they carried
her on a bier so that they might take her to Gethsemane, as our Lord commanded. When
the Jews heard of this and they knew that it was our Lady Mariyam [on the bier], they went
out to her, and one of them seized her bier with his hand in order to throw her off from it
on the ground; and the angel of God smote him with a sword of fire, and cut off his hands,
and they remained hanging on the bier. And then the Jew believed on our Lord Christ, and
he entreated our Lady Mariyam with tears and repentance for what he had done, and he
wept bitterly, saying, “Verily, O pure Virgin, thou art the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Thou God in truth, I beseech Thee to have compassion upon me.” And through the prayers
of the holy Apostles his hands were restored to their former positions. When the Apostles
had buried her they remained there three days; now her death took place on Sunday, the
twenty-first day of the month of Ter. And our Lord Jesus sent angels of light, and they
carried her body away from the grave, and laid it under the Tree of Life, which is in the
Garden of Delight. Now Thomas the Apostle was not present at the time of her death, but
as he was coming on the cloud, he found her body with the angels. And one of the angels
said unto him, “Make haste and salute the body of the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Virgin Mariyam”; and he made haste and saluted her. And when he came to the Apostles
they told him how our Lady Mariyam was dead, and he said unto them, “I did not know it
until I saw her body, even as ye made me to know when I doubted the Resurrection of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And when he came to the grave to see the body of our Lady Mariyam,
and they opened the grave, they could not find her body; and they were amazed and
marveled exceedingly. And straightway Thomas told them how he had saluted her holy
302

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
body as the angels were carrying her up [to heaven]. And the Holy Spirit said unto them,
“God doth not wish her body to lie in the earth.” And God made a covenant with the
Apostles that even as He had shown Himself, so He would show her to His servants a
second time, and He bade them wait until the seventeenth day of the month Nahase (Aug.Sept.); and He fulfilled the covenant. And all the days of her life were sixty years; twelve
years she lived in the Temple, three and thirty years she lived with Joseph, and after the
Resurrection of our Lord Christ she lived for fifteen years in the house of John the
evangelist, even as our Lord commanded her when He said unto her, “Behold thy son,”
and to John, “Behold thy mother.” Salutation to the going forth of thy soul from the body
without fear of death. Salutation to the going forth of thy soul, and to thy death, which was
like unto a marriage.
And on this day also died the righteous woman Hilaria, the daughter of the Emperor Zeno.
Her father was of the True Faith, and he loved the Church. He begot two daughters,
namely this saint, and another, but he had no son. This saint, from her earliest years, used
to love to sit by herself, and she determined in her heart to adopt the ascetic life and to
wear the garb of the angels. And she went forth from the palace, and changed her apparel,
and put on a man’s attire, and departed to the land of Egypt, and thence to the desert of
Scete. And she found there a certain righteous elder whose name was Abba Bamu, and she
told him her mind, and informed him that she was a woman, and he hid her secret, and
brought her into a cell, and he visited her frequently for twelve years. And she dwelt in her
cell, and as no beard appeared upon her face, the holy elders thought that she was a
eunuch, and they called her “Hilarion (sic) the eunuch.” And an unclean Satan took
possession of her sister, whom she had left with her father, and her father gave much
money to the physicians, but they were unable to cure her of her sickness. And his fellownobles advised her father to send her to the desert of Scete, to the holy elders, for the report
of their holiness had reached the country of Rome. And her father sent her off with nobles,
and officers, and slaves, and handmaidens, and he wrote a letter to the holy elders, saying,
“O my holy fathers, I will tell you what hath happened to me. God gave me two daughters,
and one of them hath fled and I know not whither she hath gone, and of this one, her sister,
an unclean Satan hath taken possession. I have always thought that she would be a
comforter to me. I beseech your holinesses to pray on her behalf so that God may heal her
of her sickness.” And when the saints had read the emperor’s letter, they prayed that God
would heal her of her sickness; and the holy elders continued to pray on her behalf for
many days, but she was not healed of her sickness. Then they called “Hilaria the eunuch.”
who was her sister, and said unto her, “Take this daughter of the emperor and pray over
her.” And Saint Hilaria said unto them, “I am a sinner and I am not able to do this difficult
thing,” but they urged her until she took her. And Hilaria carried her off to her cell, and
prayed for her, and she was healed in a few days and that unclean Satan fled. Now Saint
Hilaria knew that the maiden was her sister, but the maiden did not recognize Hilaria, and
she embraced her, and kissed her. And Hilaria went outside [her cell] and wept, and then
she brought the maiden to the holy elders, and said unto them, “Behold, through your
prayers I have healed her sickness.” And the saints rejoiced, and they sent her to her father
in peace; and when she arrived and stood up by him he rejoiced in her greatly; and all the
people in the palace rejoiced, and gave thanks to Christ. And the emperor asked her,
saying, “What manner of life didst thou lead with the holy elders of the desert of Scete?”
And she told him about Saint Hilarion (sic), who healed her of her sickness, and she said
unto him, “He loved me very much and kissed (?) me.” when the emperor heard this his
mind was greatly disturbed, and he said unto her, “Is it seemly for a monk to kiss a
303

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
woman?” And straightway he sent a letter to the holy elders in the desert of Scete, saying,
“Send hither to me Saint Hilarion, who healed my daughter, so that I may be blessed by
him.” And the saints called Hilaria and commanded her to go to the emperor, and she wept
bitterly and prostrated herself at the feet of the desert monks, and said unto them, “I am
unable to go there.” And they said unto her, “This righteous emperor is a lover of the
Church, and it is not seemly for us to transgress his commandment, even as the Holy
Scriptures command us”; and they urged her, and she departed to the emperor her father
against her will. And when she arrived he saluted her, and all those who were with her.
When the people had gone, and the emperor was left alone with Saint Hilaria, he asked her,
saying, “I have been disturbed in my mind because I heard that thou didst kiss my
daughter, and I wish thee to explain the matter to me”; now only the emperor and empress
were there with Hilaria. And she said unto them,, “Bring me the Holy Gospel, and swear
unto me that if I tell you ye will not prevent me from departing to the desert of Scete”; and
they swore to her even as she asked. Then she spoke unto them, saying, “I am your
daughter Hilaria.” And she told them how her going forth took place, and how she had
changed her apparel, and put on a man’s attire, and she showed them the marks on her
body. And straightway they cried out loudly, and all wept [bitterly], and there was a very
great outcry in the palace, and [her parents] said unto her, “We will never let thee go.”
And Hilaria said unto them, “Remember the oath which ye swear to me on the Holy
Gospel”; and she passed the Great Fast of forty days with them, and [then] went to the
desert of Scete. And from that day the Emperor Zeno, her father, commanded the
[governors] to give to the holy men who dwelt in the desert of Scete the tax of the land of
Egypt for one year, and after this they gave the monks what they needed according to the
emperor’s command. And the monks rejoiced, and they became numerous, and they built
nine hundred churches near the monastery of Abba Macarius, and seven hundred churches
near the monastery of Abba John, and five hundred churches near the monastery of Abba
Besoy (‘Ebsoy). And Saint Hilaria lived in the mountain of Scete for five years after she
came from her father, and she died [in peace], and none knew that she was a woman until
she died. Salutation to thy going into the desert of Scete, O Hilaria.
And on this day also died the holy father Saint Gregory, the brother of Basil, Bishop of
Dasyat. Now behold we have mentioned the commemoration of his father and of his
brother in the section for the seventh day of the month of Ter. This blessed man Gregory
was appointed Bishop of the city of Dasyat, and he was a most honorable and learned man;
and behold, we have written a little about his strife in the section for the fifth day of this
month Ter. It is said of him that when he was consecrating the Offering, he used to see the
Holy Spirit descending from heaven upon the altar, and then he saw one of the Cherubim
embrace his head, and clasp him to his bosom; and then Gregory would come out of this
sleep, and rest himself on the altar; and all the people used to think that this was merely the
sleep of the body. When he had completed three and thirty years in his Episcopal office,
Saint Basil his brother came to him to visit him, for he was sick of a grievous sickness
which was caused by excessive fasting; and Gregory welcomed him and rejoiced in him.
And when Saint Gregory welcomed him and rejoiced in him. And when Saint Gregory
went up to the altar to consecrate the Offering, according to his wont, our holy Lady the
Virgin Mariyam appeared unto him, and she said unto him, “This day thou shalt come with
me.” After he had finished the Liturgy, he asked his brother Basil to admonish the people
to keep fast hold upon the True Faith. And he became like one who was asleep, and when
[they tried] to rouse him they found that he was dead. And Basil commanded them to
304

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
make a coffin for him, and they did so, and he buried him with many prayers, and psalms
and dirges. Salutation to Gregory.
And on this day also are commemorated Nicolaus the martyr, and Abba Victor the bishop.
And on this day also Paul the governor, and Silas the priest became martyrs in the days of
Marcion, the Emperor of Rome, the Melchite heretic. When all the faithful were gathered
together at Gethsemane, on the festival of the death of our Lady, Julian the infidel came
and surrounded them, and killed them, leaving not one of them alive.
On this day also Bakhayla Maryam became a martyr in Dabra Matmak.
Salutation to Jeremiah, who prophesied and was rebuked, when Israel loved to worship
gods of wood and stone. He destroyed wild beasts and fierce lions by the power of his
prayer, and therefore his festival is celebrated in Egypt.
Salutation to Paul the governor, and to Silas the priest. Salutation to John, whom the
Virgin Mariyam promised should depart from this world without seeing the terrors of
death.
Salutation to Kawestos.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 22
(January 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great and holy father Abba Anthony, the father of all the monks. This
holy father Abba Anthony was a man of the city of Keman, in the land of Egypt, to the
south of Mesr (Cairo). His parents were Christians, and from his youth up there was no
impiety in him. He went, without hesitation, to the church with his parents, and they
partook of the Holy Mysteries, and he did not laugh and play with the [other] boys, and he
never danced; and when he was a little older, he bowed before his parents, and obeyed
them, and when he was seven years old he learned the Books of the Church. Now at that
time the office of Archbishop of Alexandria was held by Abba Theonas, and when he
heard the report of Abba Anthony’s childhood, he sent a messenger and had him brought
to him, and he blessed him and prophesied concerning him, saying, “This child shall
become great before God, and the report of him shall go up into all countries”; and he laid
his hand upon him and made him a deacon. Then his parents died and they left him a little
sister. Six months after his parents died he went to the church according to his custom, and
the love of the Holy Spirit entered his heart, and he said, “Consider how the Apostles
forsook their business and followed our Lord and Redeemer Christ. They sold their
possessions, even as it is written in the Acts of the Apostles, and they brought the price
thereof and placed it at the feet of the Apostles, so that they might give it to those who
were needy, and that the hoped-for things which God had prepared for them in the heavens
might be doubled.” And he was always meditating upon this in his heart. And then he
305

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
went to the church and heard our Lord saying to the rich man in the Holy Gospel, “If thou
wishest to be perfect, go and sell all thy possessions, and give [their price] to the poor, and
lay up for thyself treasure in heaven, and come, follow Me.” And Anthony derived his
holy mind from the Lord, for he thought that those words had gone forth for him; and
forthwith he went out from the church. Now his father possessed good broad lands, and
these he gave to the men of the city, and the goods which his parents had left him he gave
to the poor and needy, and he took his sister and deposited her with the virgins. And he
loved fasting and prayer, and the life of self-abnegation, and the spiritual fight. Now the
word “monasticism” had not appeared in those days, and if any man desired to devote
himself to God he went a little way outside the city, and dwelt by himself, and lived an
ascetic life. Even thus did the great saint Abba Anthony. And Satan, who fighteth by
means of the [sinful] impulse of the flesh, and the committal of sin, used to bring a
woman’s person to Anthony in a dream, in such a way that she seemed to be sleeping with
him; but he overcame all these things by the help of God, which was with him. Then he
departed to a tomb on the seashore, and he dwelt therein and closed the doors of the tomb
on himself, and fought a great fight [therein]. And his kinsfolk and acquaintances used to
visit him and bring him food. When the Satans saw Saint Anthony fighting in this way,
they were jealous of him, and they came to him and beat him with very severe beatings,
which caused him great pain, and then they would leave him prostrate. When his kinsfolk
came to visit him they would find him lying on the ground like a dead man, and they
would lift him up and carry him to the church, and God would heal him of his sickness.
When his soul awoke he would command them to lift him up, and take him to his own
place, and they would do so. And when Abba Anthony had conquered the Satans there
came to him from below a multitude [of fiends] in the form of wild beasts, and lions, and
wolves, and serpents, and scorpions, and each one of them would rear itself up against him
to terrify him. But Abba Anthony would laugh at them, and say unto them, “If there be
any among you that hath dominion over me, let him conquer me”; and straightway they
would be scattered before him like smoke. And God gave him victory over the Satans, and
He gave him rest from the suffering and temptations, which they caused him. Twice a year
he made bread for their (i.e. the monks’) food, and the sun dried it. He allowed no one to
come into his cell to him, but [his visitors] stood outside, and he hearkened to their words;
and he continued to devote himself to the ascetic life and the spiritual fight for a period of
twenty years. Then God commanded him to comfort the people, and to teach them the
perfect fear of God and His holiness. And he departed to the district of the Fayyum, and
made monks of many of the brethren who were there, and he confirmed them in the Law of
God (now there were there many religious houses that were [full of] monks and spiritual
fighters), and then he returned to his mountain. At that time the days of persecution came,
and many men received crowns of martyrdom. And he wished to become [a martyr], and
he forsook his mountain and departed to the city of Alexandria, and confessed the Lord
Christ; but no man seized him; and he used to visit the believers who were in prison for the
Name of Christ, and comfort them. When the governor saw that Anthony was not afraid of
him, he commanded that no monk should ever be allowed to approach the governor’s
tribunal. But Anthony appeared there continually, and spoke to him often so that he might
exasperate him, and make him angry, and cause him to beat him and torture him, so that he
(i.e. Anthony) might become a martyr. But the governor would not talk to him, and he did
no harm to him whatsoever, for God preserved Anthony for the benefit of many. And
when the time of persecution was ended, the blessed Peter, Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria, the perfection of the martyr, became a martyr, and Abba Anthony returned to
306

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
his mountain, according to the Will of God. Now the apparel, which he wore, was made of
hairy sackcloth, and he never washed himself with water all the days of his life. And many
sick folk came to him, and he prayed over them and healed them. And when the many
people who came to him heard his doctrine, they would not let him live by himself as he
wished, and he feared that he would become arrogant of heart because of what God
performed through him. And he determined in his heart to go to Upper Egypt, and live in a
place where none knew him; and he took a little bread from the brethren, and he sat down
by the side of a stream of water to wait for a ship on which to embark and depart. And
whilst he was thinking thus, a voice came to him from heaven, saying, “Anthony, whither
wilt thou go? What dost thou wish for here?” And he answered and said, “Many people
come here, and they prevent me from living in solitude, and therefore I wish to go to Upper
Egypt.” And the voice answered and said unto him, “If thou wishest to go to Upper Egypt,
[go, and thou wilt find] that thy annoyance will be doubled. But if thou dost indeed wish
to live alone, go a journey of three days into the Inner Desert.” And having seen certain
Arabs who themselves wanted to travel that road, Anthony went to them, and asked them
that he might go with them into the desert, and they welcomed him with joy. And he
journeyed with them for three days, until they came to a very high mountain, where there
was clear, sweet, and very cold water, and palms, and date-palms, and fruit trees in
abundance; and Anthony loved the place which God had prepared for him, and to which
He had called him from the sea-shore. And he dwelt in that place, and the Arabs used to
bring him bread. And there were in that place many noxious beasts, but through the prayer
of Anthony God drove them away, and they returned not again to that desert. And he used
to go to his mountain, which was beyond the seashore from time to time, and visit the
brethren who were there, and comfort them, and then he would return to his mountain in
the desert. And the report of Anthony was heard of by Constantine the righteous emperor,
and he wrote to him a letter praising him, and asking him to remember him at the time of
prayer; and the brethren rejoiced at the emperor’s letter. Now Saint Anthony did not send
back a written answer to the emperor’s letter, but he said unto the brethren, “Behold, the
letter of the King of kings is read to us every day, but we neither submit to its commands
nor hearken to it.” And the brethren answered and said unto him, “This righteous emperor
is a lover of the Church, and it is meet for thee to comfort him.” And he wrote a letter to
him, and comforted him, and blessed him, and his kingdom, and all his soldiers. And the
report of Anthony was also heard by a Frankish king, namely the King of the country of
Barkinon, which was situated at a distance of seven months’ journey from the country of
Egypt. And the Frankish king sent unto Saint Abba Anthony, saying, “I beseech and
entreat thee, by the Passion of our Lord Christ, to come to us, and bless us, and all our city,
and our army.” When Anthony heard these words he was exceedingly sorry because the
king said, “by the Passion of our Lord Christ.” And Anthony stood up and prayed, saying,
“I beseech Thee, O my Lord Jesus Christ, to do Thy Will in me. If Thou wishest me to go
to the Frankish country of Barkinon, give me a sign of Thy Will.” Whilst he was saying
these words, behold a cloud of light appeared, and it carried him and brought him during
the night to the Frankish country. And the king rejoiced in him with a great joy, and all his
soldiers and people likewise rejoiced, and they brought to him those who were sick and the
blind and the lame, and he healed them by his prayer forthwith. And he dwelt with them
for seven months, teaching them the way of righteousness and life, and he arrayed many
thousands in the garb of the monastic life. And each Sunday the cloud of light bore him
away and brought him to his monastery, and he went among his sons and comforted them,
for on the following day that cloud would bear him away, and take him back to the
307

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Frankish land. After this, by the Will of God, he returned to his monastery, riding upon the
cloud. One day laziness (or inertness) came upon him and there came unto him a voice
which said, “Get thee outside the city so that thou mayest see.” And he went outside [the
city] and he found there the similitude of an angel who wore the garb of the monastic life,
and the girdle, and the cord of the cross, and on his head was a skullcap like a helmet; and
he was sitting down plaiting palm leaves. Then he rose up and prayed and sat down again,
and continued to plait palm leaves. And a voice came unto Anthony, saying, “O Anthony,
act in this wise, and thou shalt have rest from war against Satans.” And Anthony took the
angel who was dressed as a monk as an example, and from that day neither inertness, nor
the war of the Satans attacked him. And our Lord Christ appeared unto him many times,
and comforted him and strengthened him, and said unto him, “Verily, I say unto thee, O
My chosen one Anthony, because of thy labor, and thy fighting, and thy devotion to God
alone by thyself in this desert, and because of thy love for Me, I will magnify thy name,
and will exalt thy horn in all the ends of the earth. And I will make the desert places and
the monasteries like the habitations of doves, and they shall be full of monks, especially
thine own monasteries, which shall endure until the end of the world. Whosoever shall
celebrate thy commemoration, and shall give alms or incense, or an offering in thy name, I
will blot out all his sins and he shall never see punishment. And I will exalt exceedingly
the monastery wherein thy body shall be buried, and I will place therein-righteous monks
like angels. and they shall never lack a head until the end of the world. And I will make
the kings, and judges, and rulers of the earth to bring gifts, and to give them to thy
monastery, and to thy children the monks who shall keep thy commandments.” And when
our Lord had said this He went up into heaven with great glory. And Abba Anthony
rejoiced with great joy. And he prophesied concerning the spoliation of the Church,
saying, “Those who doubt the Faith (i.e. heretics) shall have dominion over it, and then it
shall return to its former state.” And he prophesied concerning the monks, how they would
be many, and would become exceedingly numerous, and how they would abandon the
houses and monasteries in the desert, and would dwell in the towns and villages among
those who were in the world. It was Anthony who arrayed Abba Macarius in the garb of
the monk, for he was his disciple and son, and he comforted him and confirmed him, and
made him to know what would happen unto him. And he went to Abba Bula (Paule) the
Great, the first of the dwellers in the desert, and it was he who buried him in the garment of
Athanasius the Apostle. When Saint Abba Anthony knew that the time of his death had
drawn nigh, he commanded his sons to hide his body, and to give his staff to Abba
Macarius his son, and his head cloth to Abba Athanasius, and his sheep-skin cloak to Abba
Serapion the Bishop, his son. And he lay down on the ground and delivered up his soul
into the hand of God. And all the companies of the holy angels came to it, and they met it
with great joy, and they took it up to everlasting rest in the heavens. And Anthony’s
children hid his body as he commanded, for he used to rebuke those who showed the
bodies of the holy martyrs with the object of getting much money and possessions thereby,
and of keeping these possessions for themselves. This holy and blessed Anthony lived to a
good old age and became very old indeed, but his body, and strength, and power remained
unchanged, and nothing fell from his shoes(?). And he never washed in water all the days
of his life. And he departed to Christ, Whom he loved, and all the days of his life were one
hundred and twenty years. Salutation to Anthony the solitary.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

308

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TIR 23
(January 31)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Timothy the Apostle became a martyr. This saint was born and brought
up in the city of Lystra; his father was a Greek and worshipped the stars, and his mother
was a Jewess, under the shadow of the Law of Moses. When Paul the Apostle preached in
the city of Lystra, this saint Timothy heard his preaching, and his teaching, and he saw the
signs and miracles which God wrought by his (i.e. Paul’s) hands (now the learned men and
philosophers among the people of Lystra were amazed at these wonders, and were unable
to do any one of them); he came to Paul the Apostle and believed on our Lord Jesus Christ,
and was baptized in the Name of the Holy Trinity. And he rejected the gods of his father,
and abandoned the observance of the Law of his mother also, and he became a disciple of
Paul the Apostle; and he followed him into many cities, and labored with him. And the
Apostle Paul made Timothy Bishop of the city of Ephesus, and having entered therein he
preached to the men thereof in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he converted very
many of them to the True Faith, and baptized them with Christian baptism. And he
preached in many cities, both in those, which were round about Ephesus, and those, which
were far off. The Apostle Paul wrote two Epistles to him, teaching and exhorting him to
teach the people continually, [so that] they might received the way whereby he became
bishop, and priest, and deacon, and. . . .And he said unto him, “Beware of lying prophets,”
and he commanded him not to lay his hand upon any person unworthy of the office of the
priesthood, or before he had tried him. And he called him “son,” and his “beloved
Timothy,” and he sent four epistles by his hand. And observing and protecting the flock of
Christ over which he had been appointed, he illumined their hearts by his frequent
teachings, and admonitions, and discourses. And he rebuked and cursed the Jews and the
Greeks, who were all jealous of him, and they gathered together against him in the city of
Ephesus and killed him. And some of the believers among the Ephesians buried his body
as it might be on this day. And when the Emperor Constantine reigned he determined to
translate the body of the saint from the city of Ephesus, and he brought it to the city of
Constantinople, on the twenty-third day of the month of Ter; and they celebrated a great
festival in his honor on that day.
Salutation to Paul (sic) who was appointed deputy by the Epistle of Paul, of the country of
Rome.
And on this day are commemorated Athanasius, and Kerlos (Cyril), and Theodosius, the
righteous emperor. Salutation to Theodosius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

309

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TIR 24
(February 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Maria, and sainted woman and spiritual fighter. The parents of this saint
were Christians of the city of Alexandria, and though certain noblemen of the city of
Alexandria desired her, she did not wish [to give herself]. When her father and mother
died, all the possessions, which her father had left her, she gave to the poor and needy,
with the exception of a very little money. And she entered one of the houses for women,
which were outside the city of Alexandria, and she assumed the holy garb of the nun, and
she fought a great fight. For twelve years she fought against sleep, and at length having
killed [the desire for] it she never slept during the day; and during the whole of that period
of twelve years she fasted continually until the evening, according to the Rule of that
nunnery. Then she asked the abbess to allow her to shut herself in a cell to try whether she
could endure it or not. And the abbess said unto her, “Shut thyself up in thy cell.” And
she went into the cell and shut her door, and she dug a little hole in it through which she
could take in her food, and also receive the Holy Mysteries, and she dwelt in the lower part
of the cell for two and twenty years. And during all those days she stood up and prayed
continually, and ceaselessly from morning till night. During the night she slept a little, and
the rest of the night, until dawn, she passed in prayer. She fasted two days at a time, and
ate bread soaked in water. During the days of the Great Fast she never are bread at all-until the forty holy days of our Lord were ended--but she fasted three days [at a time] and
then ate beans soaked in water. When the festival of the Holy Baptism [of our Lord]
arrived on the eleventh day of the month of Ter she would ask them to bring her some of
the holy water. When they brought it to her she washed her hands and her face therein, and
[then] received the Holy Mysteries, and drank that holy water. And she fell sick, and laid
herself down on her bed until the twenty-first day of Ter, when she received the Holy
Mysteries for the second time that day. And she called the abbess and besought her, with
many entreaties, to put her feet near her, and when the abbess did so, she embraced them
and laid her face upon them and said, “I bow to thy feet which have brought thee to our
Lord Christ.” Then she called all the virgins, and asked them to come and visit her after
three days; but when the three days had passed, and it was the twenty-fourth day of Ter,
they visited her and found that she was dead. And they lifted her up and took her to the
church, and they prayed over her, and they made her ready for burial and laid her with the
bodies of the [other] holy virgins. Salutation to Maria.
And on this day also is commemorated Abba Absadi, of whom it is said that he had in him
the virtues of purity, and that because of this God protected him, and caused the memorial
of him to live in all the world.
And on this day also became a martyr the great Saint Abba Bifa, of the city of Seft, in the
country of Egypt, in the district of Teha. And on this day also are commemorated the
righteous men who pleased (?) God. Salutation to Bifa. [Wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

310

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TIR 25
(February 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the blessed Peter, the ascetic. This saint was a tax-gatherer, and as he sat
in the office of the tax-gatherer he was a man who was dense of heart (i.e. understanding),
and without any compassion, and he lacked the quality of mercy to such a degree that the
people used to apply to him the evil epithet of “merciless.” And He Who desireth not the
death of a sinner had compassion upon him, and sent to him a certain poor man to ask alms
of him. And at that moment his servant came carrying bread, and he took one of the breadcakes from his servant and threw it to the poor man, not as an act of mercy, but in order
that he might drive him away from him and that the poor man might never come back to
him; and the man having taken the bread-cake departed to his house. That night, whilst
this Peter was sleeping he saw in his sleep as if there were many beings who wished to
weigh him and as if they had a pair of scales in their hands, and many of the beings were
black, and they had exceedingly foul faces, and they stood on the left of the scales. And
there were many shining angels of beautiful appearance, who were wearing glorious white
apparel, standing on the right of the scales; and they were sorrowful and were thinking
what they could lay in the right pan of the scales. When they found nothing at all, one of
them brought that bread-cake which Peter had thrown to the poor man, and the angel who
brought the bread-cake said, “We have not found one good thing about him except this.”
And his fellow-angels answered and said unto him, “What good will this be when set
against his multitude of sins?” And as he was looking on at this he awoke from his sleep,
and he was afraid, and trembled, and was dismayed. And he reproached himself and was
sorry for his soul because he had done what was evil; and from that day onwards he
became very merciful, and he gave his house and his goods to the poor and needy, and he
changed his character. When he learned that many praised him and honored him for the
good deeds, which he had done, he fled from the world and went into the desert of Scete,
and entered the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius and became a monk therein. And he
devoted himself to the ascetic life with great strenuousness, and he fought a good fight and
pleased God with his deeds. And on the day of his death he called the aged monks, and
embraced them, and he died straightway and departed to God. Salutation to Peter.
And on this day also Saint Sebastianus became a martyr. The father of this saint was
Emperor of Rome, and he was brought up in the admonition and fear of God. When his
father died Diocletian and Maximianus reigned, and they appointed this saint to be their
deputy-governor, and they honored him as they honored his father. And he walked with
wisdom and knowledge, and he healed many sick by means of his prayers, and he opened
the eyes of the blind. When Diocletian denied the God of heaven he tried to force Saint
Sebastianus to worship idols. When he refused to do so he commanded the soldiers to tie
him to a withered tree, and to shoot at him with countless arrows; [and they did so] and
thought that he was dead. That night certain believing men found him alive, and they
untied him and carried him away into the midst of an island, and set him down there.
When Diocletian heard this he had Sebastianus brought to him, and he commanded the
soldiers to beat him with rods of iron, and they beat him for many days, and he delivered
up his soul. And he appeared in a dream to Saint Ludsena and told her where his body
was; and she took it and buried it in the grave of Peter. And God made a covenant with
311

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him that whosoever called upon his name or celebrated his commemoration should never
be attacked by the plague. Salutation to Sebastianus.
On this day also Saint ‘Askel became a martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 26
(February 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day nine and forty holy fathers, the elders of the desert, became martyrs, and they
sent to the emperor and his sons the reasons for their martyrdom which took place in the
days of the Emperor Theodosius, the son of the Emperor Arcadius, the Just. Now
Theodosius had no son, and he sent unto the holy elders of the desert of Scete, asking them
to beseech God to give him a son. And among them was a certain elder, who was very
great, and his name was Bisudura, and he wrote to the emperor and said unto him, “God
doth not wish a son to be begotten by thee, so that he may not associate with the doubters
in an unclean Faith.” And it came to pass that when the king had read the letter of the
saints he thanked God, and held his peace. And certain wicked men advised him to marry
a second wife so that by her he might beget a son to inherit his kingdom after him. And
the emperor answered and said unto them, “I will do nothing whatsoever except by the
command of the holy elders of the desert of Scete in the country of Egypt.” Now their
fame had reached all the ends of the world. And the emperor sent a second messenger to
enquire of the saints concerning this matter. And that messenger had a son who asked his
father to take him with him, and he took the boy with him, so that he might be blessed by
the holy elders. And when the messenger and his son came to the elders, and they read the
emperor’s letter, they took the messenger of the emperor, (now Abba Bisudura was dead,)
and brought him to the body of Abba Bisudura, and they said unto the body, “O our father,
behold a letter from the emperor hath arrived and we know not how to answer it.” And
straightway Abba Bisudura, the elder, rose up, and said, “Did I not say unto thee, Tell the
emperor that God will not give him a son, so that he may not defile himself by associating
with those who doubt. And if he marrieth ten more wives God will not give him a son?”
And having said these words the blessed Bisudura turned and lay down. And the holy
elders wrote a message to the emperor according to what Saint Bisudura had said, and they
gave the paper to the emperor’s messenger. And when the messenger had gone forth to
depart, the pagan barbarians arrived. And a certain great elder, whose name was John,
stood up and said unto the brethren, “Behold the barbarians have come and they wish to
kill us. He who wisheth to become a martyr let him stand up with me, and he who is
afraid, let him go up to the fortress.” And some of the monks fled, and those who were left
with Abba John were nine and forty elder monks; and the barbarians came and slaughtered
all the nine and forth elder monks. And the son of the messenger of the emperor turned
back from the road, and he saw the angels laying crowns upon the heads of the elder
martyrs; now the name of that young man was Deyas. And he said unto his father,
“Behold, I see the angels of the spiritual beings laying crowns on the heads of the elders.
And now, I myself will go and receive a crown like them.” And his father answered and
312

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
said unto him, “I will go with thee, O my son,” and they went back and revealed
themselves to the pagan barbarians, who slew them, and they received crowns of
martyrdom. After the barbarians had departed the monks came down from the fortress,
and they collected the bodies of the saints, and they made them ready for burial and laid
them in a cave. And they prayed before them each night, and sang psalms and hymns, and
were blessed by them. And certain men came and stole the body of Saint Abba John, and
took it to the city of Bitanun; and the saints waited a few days, and then took him and
brought him into his place, and the others [they took] to the Fayyum. And they stole the
body of the young man, [the son of the emperor’s messenger,] and when they brought it to
the Fayyum, the angel of God snatched it up, and brought it back to the body of his father.
Many times did the monks try [by night] to separate the body of the young man from that
of his father, but in the morning they found the two bodies together again. At length one
of the elders saw the messenger in a vision, who said unto him, “Glory be to God! When
we were in the flesh we were never separated, and why should we be separated when we
are with our Lord Christ?” From that day none separated them. When the barbarians
pillaged the desert of Scete the monks were afraid for the bodies of the holy elders, and
they removed them from their places to the pit of the church of Saint Macarius. And they
made for them a large shrine there [in the form of] a cave, and they built over it a church in
their names in the days of Theodosius the archbishop. And when Abba Benjamin came to
the desert of Scete he established for them a festival on the fifth day of the month of
Yakatit, the day when his body and theirs appeared. And the church, which existeth to this
day, is well known, and its name in Coptic is “Behama Bakasit,” that is to say, “nine and
forty martyrs.” Salutation to the nine and forty martyrs.
And on this day also died Saint Anastasia. This holy woman was a daughter of the palace
of the city of Constantinople, and she was exceedingly beautiful. The Emperor Bastianus
wished to marry her, but she did not wish this, and she never imagined it in her heart, for
the emperor already had a wife living; on the contrary she made known to the wife of the
emperor that the emperor wanted to marry her. And the wife of the emperor sent this holy
woman out of the palace secretly, and she caused her to be taken by ship to the country of
Egypt, and she built her a religious house outside the city of Alexandria, and that house
was called by her name. And when the emperor knew that Saint Anastasia had departed to
the land of Egypt, he sent after her and searched for her. And when Anastasia knew this,
she put on a man’s dress, and disguised herself as a judge (or officer), and fled to the desert
of Scete, and took refuge with Abba Daniel, the abbot, to whom she revealed her secret.
And he took her and placed her in a cell by herself and no one knew that she was a woman,
but Saint Daniel commanded a righteous elder to draw a vessel of water for her once a
week, and to set it down by the door of that cell. And she lived there for eight and twenty
years, fighting the fight, and leading the ascetic life with fasting, and prayer, and
prostrations, and vigil. And when the elder died who used to draw water for her, Abba
Daniel commanded his disciple to do as the elder used to do. And the holy woman used to
write her will on a tile and set it down by the door of her cell, and the disciple of Abba
Daniel would take the tile to his teacher knowing nothing whatsoever about what was
written upon it. One day he brought the tile to his teacher, and when Abba Daniel had read
it, he wept, and said unto his disciple, “Rise up, O my son, let us go and bury the body of
this saint, for he wished to be free from his body.” And they went and came to the cell,
and they received a blessing from Anastasia, and she said unto Abba Daniel, “For God’s
sake do not wrap me up for burial in anything except this garment which is on me”; then
she prayed and said, “I commit myself to the keeping of God,” and she lay down on the
313

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
ground and died. And they wept over her, and took thought for burying her. When the
disciple of Abba Daniel drew near to her to swathe her, he saw that her breasts were like
unto dried fig leaves; (now they became like this through excessive ascetic practices,) and
Abba Daniel marveled, and was silent. When they had buried her they returned to their
cell, and his disciple fell down at the feet of Abba Daniel, and he entreated him, saying,
“For God’s sake, tell me the story of this saint, for I saw that she was a woman.” And
Abba Daniel began to tell him how she belonged to a noble and royal family of the city of
Constantinople. And how she gave herself to Christ, and how she abandoned the glory of
this fleeting world, and how this woman fought the great fight which she fought against
Satan, and how she cast aside a woman’s weakness, and overcame the might of strong
men, and pleased God, should serve as admonitions to us who are men.
Salutation to the nine and forty monks who became martyrs, and the emperor’s messenger
and his son, and to Anastasia.
And on this day also are commemorated Mesratius (Masterius), and Sernius (Sorenus), the
martyrs, and Joseph, who loved the poor. Salutation to Joseph, who was like unto Tabitha,
and gave away all his possessions.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 27
(February 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Sarabyos (Serapion) became a martyr. This saint was a man from the
city of Bebnusi, in the north of Egypt, in the district of Lower Mesr (Cairo). He had much
money and possessions, and flocks, and he loved to give alms, and was very charitable.
When the day of persecution came, he heard that the governor Romanus was going about
seeking for Christians to torture, and this saint went forth from his city seeking the
governor. And he had a friend whose name was Theodore, and a certain shepherd, who
tended his flocks, and whose name was Sorma, and these followed the saint, and they drew
nigh unto Romanus, governor of the city of Alexandria, and confessed before him the Lord
Jesus Christ; and the governor shut Sarabyos (Serapion) up in prison. When the men of the
city heard of this, they gathered together with the soldiers, and they came to the governor,
bringing their weapons of war with them, and they wanted to kill the governor and to take
the saint from him. And the saint prevented them, and said unto them, “I came of my own
free will to shed my blood for the Name of Christ, our Lord.” And the governor embarked
on a ship and departed, and the saint went with him, and when they arrived at the city of
Alexandria the governor commanded the soldiers to torture the saint severely on the wheel,
[and they did so]. And they cast him into a red-hot furnace, and boiled him in a cauldron
of pitch and bitumen, and they cut the tendons of his body, and they laid him on a [red-hot]
iron bed, and they drove iron nails through his body. And the saint bore all these tortures
patiently, for the angel of God sustaineth him that is tortured. Then they hung him upon a
tree, and shot at him with arrows, but the angel of God brought him down, and he bound
the governor with fetters, and hung him up in the place of the saint and shot at him with
314

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
arrows, whilst the governor cried out, “I am Romanus the governor.” And Saint Sarabyos
(Serapion) said unto him, “As God liveth I will not bring thee down from this tree until
thou hast set free all those who are in prison; and thou shalt write an account of their
strifes, and thou shalt command the soldiers to cut off their heads.” [And the governor did
so,] and they received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens; now they were
in number five hundred and thirty souls. And Romanus commanded a certain nobleman,
whose name was Harneus to take the saint with him to his city, and to torture him there
and, if he would not turn from his unclean opinion, to kill him; and the nobleman took the
saint with him in the ship. When night came they arrived in port, and they slept, (now, by
the Will of God the ship came to the native city of the saint,) and when the sailors woke up
in the morning and found that the place where they arrived had been changed, they
marveled exceedingly. And a voice came to Sarabyos (Serapion), saying, “Behold, this is
thy city.” And they brought him out of the ship, and tortured him severely, and they cut
off his head with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. And Romanus brought down his apparel, and swathed him for burial, and gave
him to his kinsfolk. Salutation to Sarabyos (Serapion) the martyr.
And on this day also is commemorated the translation of the body of Saint Timothy, the
Apostle, from the city of Ephesus to the city of Constantinople; it was translated by the
righteous Emperor Constantine who translated many of the bodies of the holy apostles and
martyrs to the city of Constantinople. When he heard that the body of Saint Timothy was
in the city of Ephesus, he sent certain faithful priests, and they translated it to the city of
Constantinople, and they laid it in the Sanctuary of the Holy Apostles. Salutation to the
translation of thy body, O Timothy.
And on this day also is celebrated the festival of Suriel, who is called “Safori,” who was
with the righteous man Ezra, and told him hidden mysteries. He prayeth always on behalf
of sinners. Salutation to Suriel.
And on this day also Saint Abba Bifamon became a martyr. This saint was a virgin from
his youth, and he loved God, and he was merciful to the poor and the needy; and he
abandoned this fleeting world. His father, whose name was Anastasius, belonged to a
noble family, and his mother’s name was Sosna (Susannah); and they were Christians, and
they loved almsgiving, and they kept the festivals of our Lord Christ, and of our Lady
Mary, and of the holy martyrs; and they gave to the poor whatsoever they needed. And
they lived in the city of Wesim in the district of Mesr (Cairo). And God gave them this
saint, whose form was exceeding goodly, and they rejoiced and added to their good works
and benevolence. When he was grown up, and his days were nine years, they handed him
over to a certain God-fearing priest that he might teach him; and the priest took him and
taught him literature, and philosophy; and he admonished him, and made him strong in the
knowledge of the Books of the Holy Church. And he attended church devotedly, and
fasted, and prayed, and kept vigil, and made prostrations; and God wrought many signs
and wonders by his hands, of which the following are examples: There was a certain poor
man who was sick of a disease in his hands and feet, and he begged the saint to give him
alms, and the saint stretched out his holy hands to give the beggar money, and straightway
he was healed of his disease, and he became whole and without a blemish, and all his limbs
became sound. And on another occasion when he was reciting the Psalms of David, a
certain man there, whom an unclean spirit had thrown down, cried out, saying, “O saint of
God, let me destroy him, for his parents oppress men”; and the saint prayed, and made
315

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
entreaty to God, and the man whom the Satan cast down was healed. And the angel of
God appeared unto the teacher of the saint, (now he was a righteous man,) and he informed
him about all that would happen to the young man Bifamon, and said unto him, “He shall
become a martyr”; and the priest and his mother Sosna (Susannah) paid him greater honor
than before. And as he grew up he continued to do the works of excellence, and works of
the spirit, without ceasing, and at length the report of him was heard in all countries. And
our Lord Jesus Christ used to appear unto him with His holy angels, and our Lady Mary
used to comfort him. And he lived with his teacher for eight years. And he used to remain
without eating for seven days and seven nights at a time, and he ate once a week only.
And his parents spoke to him about marrying a wife, and he said unto them, “What is the
good of a wife to me in this fleeting world, for it shall pass away and all the desire
thereof?” And his parent rejoiced in him, and they added to their good works from that
day onwards. Six months after this his parents died, and the saint gave alms to the poor,
and he devoted himself to the Church, and strove to fulfill all the commandments of the
Holy Gospel. And in those days certain men of the Persians rose up against Rome and
they slew Numerianus, the king, in battle, and the empire of Rome remained without an
emperor; now Numerianus left only two daughters and one son, whose name was Justus,
and who became a martyr. And the chiefs of the palace gathered together, and they took
counsel together, and they sent messengers into every country to collect for them strong
men for the war. And when the messengers came to Upper Egypt, they found a strong and
powerful young man, with a bold heart, pasturing sheep, and his name was “’Agripada”;
and he had been a habitation for Satan from his youth up. And the messengers rejoiced
exceedingly, and they took him with them to the city of Antioch, and when ‘Agripada
arrived the officer, who was captain of the royal horses, rejoiced in him. One day
‘Agripada took a couple of reeds tied together and played upon them like a flute, and Satan
entered into the horses, and they capered about and cried out with loud cries. And the
daughter of the king who had arrived at woman’s estate, heard the noise, and she looked
out of her window in the upper room of the palace, and ‘Agripada pleased her with his
playing. And Satan thrust into her heart the desire for fornication, and she summoned him
to her, and she married him, and arrayed him in [royal] apparel, and called him
“Diocletian,” for they used to change the names of men when they became kings. And
when the younger daughter of the king saw what the elder had done, she became jealous,
and she married an officer whose name was Maximianus, and she arrayed him in royal
apparel, and made him a king; and Maximianus and Diocletian were equals in the kingdom
of the city of Antioch. And Satan appeared unto them and said, “I am he who set the idea
of fornication in the hearts of the king’s daughters, who have made you kings. If ye will
obey my commandment, I will make all men on the earth to submit to you. Henceforward
bow down, and worship me. Make models [of men and women] in gold and silver, and
call them gods, Apollo, Artemis, and the like, and command all men to perform the
ceremony of incense before them. Shut the churches, and open the houses of idols, and
command ye all the men who are in the palace to do this. Whosoever will not obey you
and worship the gods shall die an evil death; cut off his head with a sharp sword.” And
they answered and said unto Satan, “We will obey thee, and will do as thou tellest us.”
And they worshipped him straightway, and they did all that Satan commanded them to do
in every country of their kingdom. And they appointed a certain nobleman, whose name
was Romans, governor over the city of Alexandria, and all the region round about, and
they made Arianus governor over the city of Antinoe and Egypt, and they commanded
them to carry out these orders in all the towns and villages. When Abba Bifamon heard
316

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
this report, he was exceedingly sorry, and he hid himself until he knew what was going to
happen. And he called his friend Theodore, and they talked together for a day about what
they had heard, and they were exceedingly sad. And they multiplied their prayers, and
entreated God to save them from evil. And Saint Bifamon increased his good works, and
report of him was made to the infidel king, and to Maximianus, by the deniers of Christ.
And they told them, saying, “A certain man whose name is Bifamon, of the city of Wesim,
on the border of Mesr (Cairo), is a Christian magician, and he trangresseth the commands
of the kings, and he curseth the gods.” And straightway the king wrote a letter and sent it
to Arianus, and commanded him to take the saint and to torture him until he worshipped
Apollo and Artemis, and if he would not obey, to cut off his head with the sword. And the
angel of God appeared unto Saint Bifamon and told him what had taken place, and he
informed him that he and his mother would become martyrs. And he showed him the
crowns, which were prepared for himself and his mother, and he commanded him to
depart, and to take with him his slave Diganes. And straightway Saint Abba Bifamon rose
up and came to his mother, and told her all that he had seen, and she told him how she had
seen the same vision; and the saints Abba Bifamon and his mother rejoiced together. And
the saint went to his abode and prayed until the morning. When the morning had come he
sent again to his friend Theodore, who came to him, and Bifamon told him what he had
seen. And he said unto him, “After the days of the persecution have passed by thou shalt
be appointed bishop of this city”; and he commanded to build a church for him, and then
they embraced and bade each other farewell. After a few days Arianus the governor came
to the city of Wesim, and he had the head men of the city brought to him, and he
questioned them concerning Bifamon, the judge, and said unto him, “This man curseth the
gods”; and the head men of the city were sorry on account of Saint Abba Bifamon, for he
was beloved by them. At that time Abba Bifamon rose up, and put on beautiful apparel,
and prayed for a long time, and then he embraced all the men of his house, and mounted
his white horse, and he went to the place where all the head men of the city were gathered
together; and when they saw him they paid him honor and went with him to Arianus the
governor. And when Arianus saw Abba Bifamon, he rejoiced in him, and he rose up and
embraced him and said unto him, “Peace be unto thee.” And the saint answered, “Why
dost thou say ‘peace’ to me? for the interpretation of ‘peace’ is ‘joy.’ Verily I rejoice, and
am glad, because I am going to the Lord my God and Redeemer, Jesus Christ.” As for
thee, however, the Book saith of [such as] thee, “There is no joy for the wicked” (Isaiah
xlviii, 22). And Arianus said unto him, “I did not come for thee to speak words of insult to
me, but I came to thee with an order from the emperor commanding thee to offer sacrifice
to the gods.” And the saint said unto him, “God forbid! But it is right that I should
worship the True God, and not the work of the hand of man, as the prophet saith: ‘The
gods of the nations are of gold and silver, the work of the hands of the children of men.
Mouths they have and they speak not, hands have they and they handle not, feet have they
and they walk not, eyes have they and they see not, ears have they and they hear not, noses
have they and they smell not; they speak not with their throats, and there is no breath in
their mouths’ (Psalm cxv, 4 ff.). May all those who make them become like unto them. I
will worship none save my Lord Jesus Christ.” When Arianus heard these words from him
he was exceedingly angry with him, and he tortured him with every kind of torture; and he
tied him to the back (tail ?) of a horse, which he made to gallop through all the city. And
when his mother and his servants heard of this they all came [to him], (now his servants
were five hundred [in number,]) and the saint rebuked them and spoke unto them, and his
mother with them, many words from the Holy Gospel. But they all cried out, saying,
317

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
boldly, “We are Christians,” and they overturned the throne of Arianus the infidel. And
the governor commanded the soldiers to dig a large pit, and to fill it with fire, and to cast
them all into it alive; and they did as he commanded them; and Saint Abba Bifamon
encouraged them, and exhorted them, and made them to endure [their sufferings] until they
finished their martyrdom. And the mother of the saint asked him to pray for her, and he
made the sign of the Cross over her, and said unto her, “Depart in peace”; and straightway
they cast her body into the fire, and she received the crown of martyrdom with those
martyrs. And Arianus sent the saint to Maximianus the emperor, and straightway the
emperor said unto him, “Art thou Bifamon the sorcerer? Thou hast transgressed our
command, and hast not worshipped the gods.” And the saint said unto him, “I will not
worship thy gods. Only Jesus Christ our Lord will I worship; as for thee, thou canst go to
Ghannum.” And the emperor was wroth, and tortured him severely, and when he was tired
of torturing him he sent him to Romanus, who sent him to Arianus. Now the saint neither
ate nor drank the whole time he was on the journey. And Arianua took the saint, and drove
sharp nails through his hands and his feet, and he said unto him, “If thou wilt not worship
the gods I will destroy thee”; and the saint reviled him and his gods, and cursed them. And
Arianus commanded the soldiers to drag him through the city, and to burn him outside the
city of Antinoe, and they did so, but our Lord Jesus Christ took him out of the fire
uninjured. Now when the saint was standing in the fire much blood flowed from his feet.
And there was standing there among the people a certain blind leper, and he took some of
the blood and smeared it on his eyes and on his body, and straightway he became able to
see, and his body was cleansed from his leprosy. And he cried out, and confessed our Lord
Jesus Christ, and said boldly, “I am a Christian, I believe on my Lord Jesus Christ.” And
Arianus commanded them to cut off his head with the sword, and they did so, and he
received the crown of martyrdom. And Saint Bifamon called his servant Diyoganos
(Diogenes) and commanded him secretly to anoint his body and to swathe it with fine
linen, and to relate the story of his fight to the believers who were in the city of Wesim,
and to tell them that the days of persecution would pass; and he made over his body the
sign of the Cross, saying, “In the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
One God.” And the saint approached the soldiers and said unto them, “Do ye what the
governor hath commanded you [to do].” And the soldiers took him away from the
governor to a place where they would be with him alone, and they cut off his head, and he
received the incorruptible crown of martyrdom. And much blood flowed from his neck,
and his servant Diyoganos (Diogenes ?) spread out the fine linen napkin which he had laid
up by him, and caught the holy blood therein, and so sweet a perfume filled that place that
the soldiers marveled, and were dismayed, and great fear fell upon them. And when the
soldiers departed many believers came, and they and his servant prepared the body of the
saint for burial in a splendid manner, and they brought sweet-smelling unguents ad
anointed it, and sang many psalms and dirges over it. And straightway they carried it
outside the city to the west, and they buried it there, and many miracles were made
manifest at his grave. And the servant of the saint took that napkin and laid it upon him.
And when he wished to depart to his city he fell into doubt and wondered what he should
do. And Saint Bifamon appeared unto him, and told him to make known his story to his
friend Theodore, and to the men of his city. And God sent unto him certain believers who
carried him with them in the ship, and whilst he was with them in the ship God made
manifest many miracles through that napkin. And his servant Diyoganos (Diogenes ?) told
them all that had happened to Saint Bifamon, and they marveled exceedingly and glorified
God. Then he came to his city Wesim, and he told his friend Theodore everything, which
318

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
had happened to Saint Bifamon, and he gave him the napkin through which very many
signs and wonders took place. And this napkin was kept by them until the infidel
Diocletian died, and Constantine the righteous reigned. And the days of persecution came
to an end, when the Christian people enjoyed rest and peace in [all] the cities. And God
wished to reveal the body of Saint Bifamon, so that it might be a hope to the believers, and
a consolation, and strength. Now he became a martyr in the city of Kaw, in Upper Egypt,
in the district of Tema, on the twenty-seventh day of the month of Ter. And God made
manifest from his body signs and wonders, and great healings, and especially in the church
in the city of Demonu, on the twenty-seventh day of the month of Ter. On that day many
people assemble therein, and God maketh manifest in them great healing through the
martyrdom of Bifamon. Salutation to Abba Bifamon.
And on this day also are commemorated Theophilantus and Sarnis (or Sosa), the martyrs.
And on this day they [angels] carried away Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel,
the son of Cainan, the son of Henok (Enos), the son of Seth, the son o Adam, with the
rushing of stars, and of lightening and of winds, and they took him up above the heavens
and seated him between two spiritual beings. And he is called the scribe of the
commandments of God. And he said, “I will answer on behalf of the righteous, and of him
that goeth forth, holy and great, from the habitation of God.” And thence he treadeth upon
Mount Sina, and appeareth with the armies and mighty powers from heaven, and everyone
feareth him when he is on the waters. He judgeth Dan, which is on the right hand of the
Arabs, and he reciteth the memorials of their petitions until the sleep of a dream calleth
him, and visions of all are upon him; and they revile the watchers of heaven. And he drew
nigh a house which was built upon a stone of crystal, and the walls whereof were inlaid
with slabs of stone. And he saw another house which was larger than this, and all its doors
were open, and it was built on a tongue of fire, which uttered praise and glory. And he
looked and saw a high throne, and the appearance thereof was that of ice, and the circle
thereof was like the sun; and the voice of a cherub was going forth under the throne. And
he saw seven mountains, three facing the east and three facing the south, and the middle
one projected upwards into the heavens. And he saw one hundred and forty wings, and the
lord of the winds, and he saw four other faces. And he prophesied concerning Christ,
saying, “With the Head of Days was going another, and His face was like the face of a
man, and it was fitted with grace like one of the holy angels.” And he also saith
concerning Christ, “And in that day the Son of man shall be called before the Head of
Days, when as yet the sun shall not have been created, nor the stars made.” And he also
saith, “He shall be a staff to the righteous, and a lights of heaven and described them, one
by one, each to its people, each to its dominion, and each by its name. And he spoke
concerning the doors of heavens; one in the west, one on the right hand, and one on the
left.” And he spoke concerning Adam, “Behold, a bull went forth from the earth, and this
[bull] was white.” And he spoke concerning Eve, saying, “There went forth a calf, a
female.” And he saith concerning the Temple: “I saw them overturning this ancient
house, and they brought out all the pillars, and all the plants (?) and beauty of this house.”
And concerning the Church he saith: “God brought sheep into a new house, which was
larger and higher than the one before it, and He set them in the front one, which was
veiled, and all the pillars thereof were new, and the beauty thereof was new, and greater
than that of the former house which was rejected, and all the sheep were in the midst
thereof.” And he speaketh concerning the believers: “These sheep were all white, and
their wool was abundant and pure, and all those who were scattered and the wild beasts of
319

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the desert, and the fowl of the heavens, were gathered together into this house, for they
were all chosen, and they returned to his house.” Salutation to Enoch, who was caught up
into heaven.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 28
(February 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Clement became a martyr. This saint was the son of a widow who was a
believer whose name was Akrosia, and who lived in the city of Kiras, in the days of
Aranius and Lucius, Kings of the Galatians. And the boy grew up, and his mother taught
him all the law and doctrine of the Church. When his days were twelve years, he fought a
great fight with fasting, and many prayers, and he devoted himself to the ascetic life. He
ate nothing which had been cooked by fire, and he never ate meat, but he lived on the
produce of the earth, like the Three Children. When he was appointed deacon he increased
in knowledge and wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him. When the report of him
reached Diocletian he had him brought to him, and he persuaded him earnestly, and
promised him to make him his son, if he would obey his commandment and sacrifice to his
idols. When he would not hearken to his commands, he tortured him with every kind of
torture, but God gave him strength under the torture, and He raised him up unharmed, and
He put the wicked ones to shame. Thus was reckoned to him the first of the seven
martyrdoms which he suffered at the hands of the tribunes, namely that suffered at the
hands of Diocletian, who tortured him to death a second time. When Diocletian wearied
[of him] he sent him to the Emperor of Rome, and he wrote to him, saying, “This is a
sorcerer, whose like I have never seen, and the like of whose sorcery I have never seen.
And behold I have sent him to thee that, peradventure, thou mayest be able to persuade his
heart to sacrifice to our gods.” When he came to the governor of Rome, they brought to
him apparel of gold, but he would neither take the garments nor look at them. And the
governor was wroth with him, but the saint was not afraid, and the emperor tortured him
severely on the wheel, and he beat him and cut off his limbs; but God raised him up whole
and uninjured, even as he was at first. Third martyrdom: And when the governor was
tired of torturing him, he sent him to Maximianus in the city of Nicomedia, and he tortured
him severely, but God put him and all his enemies to shame, and raised him up whole and
uninjured. Fourth martyrdom: When Maximianus was tired to torturing him he sent him
back to the governor of Kiras, the city in which he had been reared, and the governor
tortured him very severely. Fifth martyrdom: The governor of Kiras sent him to the
Emperor Tatianus, and the saint found many confessors there, and he comforted them, for
the saint was perfect in his speech, and the grace of God was upon him; and the emperor
tortured him severely. Sixth martyrdom, by the hand of Maximianus: And when they took
him there, the saint found Ganikalawos, and many martyrs, and Maximianus tortured him
severely. Seventh martyrdom by the hand of Lucian the governor, who tortured him
severely, and then cut off his head; thus the saint received the crown of martyrdom. And a
certain believing woman whose name was Sophia came and took his body, and prepared it
for burial and buried it. Salutation to Clement.
320

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also Saint Abba ‘Akaweh became a martyr. This holy man came from the
country of the Fayyum, from a city the name of which is Bamay, and he fought a great
fight in the ascetic life. And Satan appeared unto him boldly, and the saint seized him by
the hair of his head, and punished him very severely; and Satan adjured the saint, saying,
“By the Passion of Christ, release me.” And the saint sent him away and he disappeared in
the form of smoke. Then the saint went to the governor’s house during the time of the
persecution, and he cried out boldly, saying, “I am a Christian,” and the governor tortured
him severely, and after this he cut off his head with a sword; and the saint received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And his body is at the present day in
the monastery of Naklon, and many signs and miracles appear through it. Salutation to
Abba ‘Akaweh.
And on this day eight hundred (sic) men of the company of Saint ‘Akaweh became
martyrs. Salutation to you, O ye eight hundred martyrs.
Salutation to you, O ye company of men who pleased God, from among whom sprang
Clement.
Salutation to Abraham, the servant of God, and Isaac, His friend, and Israel, His beloved.
And on this day also died Saint Joseph, son of the Jew Mahawe, This saint was an
Israelite, and he grew up in the Jewish Faith, and learned the Books of the Jews. One day
he saw the Christian children learning from a book, and he asked his mother to let him join
them, and she permitted him to do so, and he learned all the Christian Books, and the Faith
of Christ entered his heart. One day he met a young man who was a Christian, who loved
him greatly and taught him the Christian Law at the time of the Eucharist, and Joseph
received the Holy Mysteries. And on the following day [the children of] the readers, and
the psalm-singers gathered together to Joseph, and they made with their apparel the
similitude of a tabernacle and a shrine, and they brought bread from their parents’ houses,
and they appointed an archbishop and bishops from among their number. Then they
amused themselves, and celebrated the sacrament of the Offering, and then they went and
ate and drank in the house of the priest, and he taught them and they remained thus. When
the father of Joseph heard of this he was filled with wrath, and he bound the arms of his
son behind him, and he took him into the tavern, and cast him into the red-hot oven which
was there, and shut the door upon him; but the angel of God extinguished the fire and
cooled [the oven]. And the mother of Joseph missed her son, and she wept and lamented
and she did not know what to do. And after seven days and seven nights had passed, a
certain John heard the story of Joseph, and how he was in the oven, and he went with his
companions, and they wept for him, and cried out to him by his name. And Joseph said
unto them, “Weep ye not, O my brethren, I am alive by the help of our Lady Mary, the
mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, for it was she who hid me in her apparel in the red-hot
oven.” When they heard this, they told the archbishop, and he went with the priests, and a
Book of the Gospel, and a Cross, and censers, and he came into the oven, and made a
prayer, and brought out Joseph unscathed from the midst of the fire, and untied his bonds.
And Joseph asked him for Christian baptism. And when his father Mahawe heard of this,
he fell down at the feet of the archbishop, and he believed on Christ, together with the men
of his house. And Joseph continued to fast seven days at a time until he was eight and
twenty years old, when he entered his cell. When he knew that his departure was nigh, he
came into the church of Saint George the martyr, and he stood before the picture of our
holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, and entreated her to make intercession for him with her Son.
321

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And she spoke to him from out of the picture, saying, “Rejoice, O Joseph, on the third day,
at the third hour of the day, thou shalt die.” Salutation to Joseph.
And on this day also are commemorated Tabela and her three sons.
And on this day also God blessed seven (sic) loaves, and a few fish, even as it is said in the
Gospel [Matthew xiv, 19].
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

TIR 29
(February 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint ‘Aksani (Xenae), which is, being interpreted, “stranger.” This holy
woman was the daughter of rich and noble parents of the city of Rome, and she was their
only child. And she fought the spiritual fight from her youth up, and she fasted and prayed
frequently by day and by night, and she went to a certain house of virgins in the city of
Rome, and devoted herself to them. What food the servants used to bring her from her
father’s house she gave to the poor and needy, and she ate the food, which the virgins ate.
And she was always reading the histories of nuns, and she made many petitions to God that
He would made her a companion to them. And her father betrothed her to a certain
nobleman of the city of Rome, and they arrayed her in glorious apparel, and adorned her
with jewels of gold and silver. And when the day of the marriage-feast and the marriage
arrived, he said unto her mother, “O my mother, when ye have given me in marriage, for
some time I shall not be able to go to the nunnery. I wish to go to visit them now, and to
embrace and salute them, and I will return quickly.” And her mother said unto her, “Go,
my daughter, and tarry not.” When her mother said this to her, ‘Aksani (Xenae) took all
her ornaments of gold and silver, and her royal apparel, and with her two handmaidens she
departed and went to the sea, where she found a ship which was sailing for the island of
Cyprus, and she with her handmaidens embarked in the ship and arrived in the island of
Cyprus. And she called herself ‘Aksani (Xenae), which is being interpreted, “stranger.”
And she went to Saint Epiphanius, and told him all her business, and he sent her to the city
of Alexandria. And when she arrived there the Apostle Paul appeared unto her in a dream
and told her everything, which she was to do, and called her by her name. And on the
following day she visited Saint Theophilus, the archbishop, and she shaved off the hair of
her head, and he arrayed her in the garb of the men. And she sold all she had with her,
both her silver ornaments and her apparel, and she built a church in the name of Saint
Stephen the Protomartyr. And she and certain of the principal virgins and nuns all lived in
that church, and this holy woman fought a great spiritual fight. She ate nothing else except
herbs. She slept upon the bare ground and had no mattress, and she lived in this way, and
carried on her good fight, and the working of righteousness for a period of more than eight
years. Then she fell sick a little and died, and on the day of her death God, the Most High,
revealed that she was blessed by the grace of heaven in the following manner: At the time
of her death, at noon, the people saw a cross of light, and the brilliancy thereof exceeded
that of the sun, and brilliant stars surrounded the cross like a crown, and it continued to
322

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
shine in this wise until they had laid the body of the saint with the bodies of the virgins,
and then it disappeared. And the people who were there knew that the cross and the stars
had appeared because of the holy woman. And straightway the two handmaidens told the
archbishop and all the people about the strife of this saint, from the beginning until the day
of her death, and how she changed her name and called herself ‘Aksani (Xenae), and how
she conjured them to conceal her and her secret, and how she always behaved towards
them as their sister and not as their mistress. And the archbishop and all the people
marveled at this, and they wrote an account of her strife from the beginning unto the end
thereof.
And on this day also is commemorated Cyriacus, the martyr and fighter.
And on this day also are commemorated the pure women of Rome, and Philemunma, and
Juliana, and Sarabamon, and Abba Gabra Nazrawi of Kawat, and the righteous men of
Dabra Dagi (Degua Me’Elaa).
And on this day also is commemorated the festival of the Birth of our Lord Jesus Christ by
our Lady Mary, the holy Virgin.
And on this day also is commemorated Abba Stephen Falasi (the “stranger”) of the desert
of the Fayyum. This holy man was a fighter, and he sought after the manner of the saints
who were in the desert. One day whilst he was wandering about in the desert, he found a
skull, which had been cast out, and this lay by itself, and it had no flesh on it. When Saint
Stephen saw it he asked God to make it to inform him concerning the history of the man to
whom it belonged, and what kind of faith he had. And straightway there came forth a
voice from the skull, saying, “I was a merchant, but did not travel to make money, I knew
nothing about alms, and I was satisfied with the multitude of possessions which I had. One
day as I was traveling on a journey to a far country I came to a desert place wherein there
was no water, and as the heat of the place became very great the camels died, and the
servants fled, and I was left alone. On the third day mine eyes became heavy, and I heard
as it were a whistling sound, and my spirit went forth from me, and took me into a place of
punishment to be rewarded according to my works. And I said unto the judges ‘grant me
permission to tell you of my doings,’ but they would not listen to me. And now I pray that
thou wilt pray to God to have mercy upon me for thy sake.” And the saint prayed to God
for him, and that he might not return to the place of torment. And he heard a voice, which
said unto him, “I have spared him for thy sake.” When Abba Stephen heard this he went
into his cell weeping, and beating his breast, and he continued his fight until he died. [This
text is faulty in several places.]
Salutation to Thy Birth, O Lamp of the Darkness.
Salutation to ‘Aksani (Xenae) the stranger.
Salutation to Stephen, of the desert of the Fayyum.
Salutation to Cyriacus the fighter.
Salutation to you, ye white ears of wheat of Dabra Dagi (Degua Me’Elaa).
Salutation to Gabra Nazrawi.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
323

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
TIR 30
(February 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became martyrs the holy and blessed virgins Pistis, Elpis, ‘Agapis, and their
mother Sophia. This blessed mother belonged to the people of the city of Antioch, and
was of noble family, and she brought forth these three daughters and called them by the
three above names, the interpretations of which are, “Faith, Hope, and Charity (i.e. Love)”;
and the interpretation of the name of their mother is “Wisdom.” And when the maidens
had grown a little, she took them to the city of Rome, and taught them goodness, and piety,
and the fear of God, and the doctrine of the Church. And when the report of her came to
the Emperor of Rome, Arianus, the wicked, he commanded [the soldiers] to fetch them and
to drag them to him by the hair of their heads; and the soldiers did as the emperor
commanded. And their mother exhorted them, and taught them, and urged them to endure
patiently, and she encouraged them in the Faith of Christ, and said unto them, “Take good
heed to yourselves, O my daughters, that your hearts become not weary through
considering the honor of this fleeting world, so that ye may not be far from the glory which
is everlasting. Endure, O my daughters, so that ye may be with your Bridegroom Christ,
and may enter with Him to the heavenly marriage-feast.” Now the days of Pistis, the
eldest daughter, were twelve years, and the days of Elpis were ten years, and the days of
‘Agapis were nine years. And when they had brought the maidens before the emperor, he
commanded them to make Pistis the eldest come near to him, and he said unto her,
“Hearken unto me and I will give thee in marriage to one of the nobles of my empire, and I
will show thee much favor; worship Apollo.” And Pistis reviled him and cursed him. And
he commanded the soldiers to beat her with rods, and to cut off her breasts, and to boil
pitch and bitumen in a cauldron and to cast her into it; and they did this to her. And she
stood up praying in the cauldron, and the fire never touched her, and the interior of the
cauldron became like the dew in the mouth of the morning. And the people who were
there marveled, and many of them believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and the soldiers cut
off their heads as they praised God. Then the governor commanded them to cut off the
head of Pistis with the sword, [and they did so,] and she received the crown of martyrdom
in the kingdom of the heavens. And her mother took away her body. Then they brought
forward the second daughter whose name was Elpis, and the soldiers scourged her and beat
her very severely, and cast her into the boiling cauldron, but the heart of the flame became
like snow. Then the emperor commanded them to take her out, and to cut off her head, and
they did this to her, and she received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens; and her mother took away her body. And Sophia was afraid for her youngest
daughter lest she should become terrified at the torture, and she encouraged her to endure.
And the governor commanded them to torture her on the wheel, and they did so, and she
cried out to our Lord Jesus Christ to strengthen her and enable her to endure; and God sent
an angel, and he smashed the wheel. And the emperor also commanded them to cast her
into a red-hot oven, and she made the sign of the Cross over her face, and she threw herself
into the oven, and straightway it became as cool dew. And those who were there saw two
men in white apparel going about her, and they marveled exceedingly; and many of them
believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and the soldiers cut off their heads and they became
martyrs. Then the governor commanded then to make iron rods red-hot in a furnace and to
lay them upon her, and God strengthened her to endure and the fire did not touch her.
324

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Then he commanded them to cut off her head, and they did so, and she received the crown
of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And their mother took the bodies of her
three daughters, and made them ready for burial, and brought them to a place outside the
city, and she sat down and wept over them; and she besought them to ask God to take away
her soul, and God received her petition and took it. And certain believers came and made
her ready for burial, and they took her body, and the bodies of her three daughters, and
buried them. And as for the wicked emperor, God sent upon him a disease, and his eyes
protruded, and his flesh split open, and his bones appeared, and his hands dropped off,
amid blood and pus, and worms fell [from him], and all his body rotted, and he died an evil
death, for God slew (?) him because of the virgins.
And on this day died Abba Minas, the forty-seventh Archbishop of the city of Alexandria.
Great tribulation came upon this holy man during the period of his office. He finished a
good fight, and he endured many tribulations, and he pleased God, and he protected his
flock for nine years and died in peace. Salutation to Minas.
And on this day also Saint Thecla, and the four virgins who were with her, became
martyrs. And with them there was a certain sinful man, a priest, whose name was Pola,
and one reported to the governor that he was a rich man, and he commanded [the soldiers]
to seize his riches. And Pola came to the governor, and entreated him to restore to him his
possessions, but he refused. And he brought the holy virgins to the governor who ordered
them to worship the sun, and when they refused the governor said unto Pola the priest, “If
thou wilt eat a dead body, and drink blood, I will give back to thee thy possessions.” And
Pola did as the governor commanded him, and he denied Christ. And when pretexts to kill
Pola were wanted by the governor he said unto him, “If thou wilt make the virgins deny
their Faith I will give back to thee thy possessions.” And Pola talked to the virgins, and
told them what the governor said unto him, and they reviled Pola, saying, “Thou son of
Satan, thou enemy of righteousness, seeing that thou art out teacher, how canst thou advise
us to deny Christ?” When the governor heard their words he commanded the soldiers to
beat them with whips, but they neither made answer to the governor, nor did they fear his
tortures. And the governor spoke again unto Pola, saying, “If thou wilt kill the virgins I
will give back to thee thy possessions.” When Pola heard this, he worked up his courage
and he went to kill the virgins, for his heart was filled with love for gold, like that of Judas
Iscariot. And the virgins said unto him, “O wicked shepherd, how canst thou destroy thy
sheep because of thy love of money? We have received from thy hand the Body and
Blood of Christ.” And whilst they were saying these words, he cut off their heads with the
sword, after the manner of a man who is killed in war. And the governor saw madness of
Pola, and he slew him with the sword and he died, having lost his money and his Faith.
Now the names of the virgins were Thecla, and Maria, and Martha and her handmaiden,
and Abeya. Salutation to Thecla and to the four virgins who were with her.
And on this day also Saint Irene became a martyr. The father of this saint was Emperor of
Rome, and his name was Marcianus, and he worshipped idols; and her mother was a
Christian woman. And having begotten this holy woman her parents built a tower for her,
and they brought her there with twelve virgins, who wore ornaments of gold and silver;
and they sent up with her ninety-seven idols for her to worship, and they sealed the door
upon her, and she remained inside for seven years and seven months. One day when she
lifted up her eyes towards the east she saw a dove with an olive branch in her mouth, and
she threw the branch on the table; and the saint lifted up her eyes again towards the west,
325

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and she saw a raven with a serpent in his mouth, which he threw on the table; and she also
saw a hawk with a crown in his mouth, which he threw on the table. And the vision being
finished she marveled. And when her teacher, whom her father the emperor had given her,
came and she had related to him the vision, he said unto her, “The dove is the wisdom of
Rome, and the olive branch is the seal of baptism; and the hawk is a strong king, and the
crown is good works, and the raven is a weak king; needs must that thou shalt suffer for
the Name of Christ.” When the saint had grown up her father and mother went up to her,
and they talked with her concerning the matter of her marriage; and Saint Irene said unto
them, “Wait for me [to answer] seven days.” And then she prayed to God that He would
direct her into the way, which was right. And the angel of God came and said unto her,
“Be strong, and of good courage, and put on strength, for Timothy, the apostle of Paul,
shall come unto thee, and he shall baptize thee with Christian baptism, and thou shalt
become a martyr. And Timothy came, and having rent the walls of the house, entered her
presence, and taught her all the commandments of the Gospel. Then he brought water, and
prayed over her, and baptized her in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy
Spirit; and he departed from her. And having risen up Saint Irene smashed all the idols of
her father. After seven days her father and her mother came unto her and talked to her as
before, and Saint Irene answered and said, “I have been called by the heavenly King, Jesus
Christ, and I have been baptized in His Name.” When her father heard his daughter’s
words he was wroth, and he took her down from her upper room and dragged her away,
and her mother followed her, scattering ashes upon her head as she went. And he
commanded his servants to bring four houses that were bound in chains, and to tie her to
them by the hair of her head. And one of the horses shied because one of the chains cut
him, and he cut off the right hand of the emperor, who fell down and died. And Irene
having risen up and prayed, lifted up the dead, and she made his hand to be as it had been
formerly. And when the people saw this they and her father believed on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and three thousand souls were baptized by her hands. When the Emperor Decius
heard of her he came into that city and seized Saint Irene, and he commanded the soldiers
to hang her up by her hair, and they did so. Then he commanded them to cast her into a
deep pit filled with serpents and scorpions; and by the power of God they all died. And he
also commanded them to saw her in halves with a saw, but the saw broke and the wicked
emperor died. And when the son of the emperor heard this he attacked the city, and he
seized Saint Irene, and he commanded the soldiers to drive sharp nails through her hands
and her feet, and to heap up a great quantity of sand on her back, and to tie her to the tails
of four horses, in order to destroy her body; but they were unable to vanquish her with all
these tortures. As for that wicked man, the angel of God killed him with a spear of fire.
And Saint Irene healed the sick, and even raised the dead. And a fourth emperor who
heard about her, had her brought into his presence, and he pressed her to offer to the gods;
and when she refused to do so he commanded them to cast her into the fire, and she came
out of the fire and cursed the emperor. And when he saw the miracle he himself believed
on Christ. And the King of Persia came to the city, and he seized Saint Irene, and drove
his spear into her with his own hands, and she died; and the angel of God came and raised
her up, and she came into the city preaching in the Name of Christ. And after a few days
she was caught up into the Garden of Delight. Salutation to Irene.
And on this day also died Gregory the Theologian.
And on this day also died Abba ‘Akresteros (Christopher) the fighter. This saint lived in
the desert of the Jordan, and one of the monks bowed before him and entreated him,
326

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
saying, “O my father ‘Akresteros (Christopher), do me an act of grace, and describe to me
all thy manner of life and work so that I may profit thereby.” And the elder said unto him,
“O my son, when I became a monk I was a young man, and I used to go by night to the
sanctuary (or, church) of Saint Theodosius to pray there. In it were eighteen steps, and on
each step I used to make one hundred prostrations until they blew the horn. Then
straightway I would go into the church, and finish my Rule with the brethren, and I
continued to do this for ten years. One day after I had finished my usual prayers, my mind
was carried away captive, and I saw two men in white raiment trimming the lamps; one
half of them they left lighted and the other half they extinguished. And I said unto them,
‘What is this thing?’ And these fathers said unto me, ‘The lamp of the man who loveth his
brother burneth.’ And I said unto them, ‘Of which kind is my lamp?’ And they said unto
me, ‘Thou lovest thy brethren, and we keep thy lamp alight.’” Then ‘Akresteros
(Christopher) went into the monastery of Sina by himself, and he dwelt there for fifty
years, the whole time fighting the spiritual fight. And a voice came unto him, saying,
“Return to thy monastery so that thou mayest be with thy fathers”; then he returned to his
monastery, and died in peace.
And on this day also are commemorated the righteous who fled.
Salutation to ‘Akresteros (Christopher).
Salutation to the many thousands of souls who looking on at Irene believed on the Lord
Jesus Christ. [The Bodleian MS. gives the number as 130,030.]
Here endeth that which is to be read during the month of Ter in the peace of God, to Whom
be glory forever and ever. Amen.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

327

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE SIXTH MONTH
YEKATIT 01
(February 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place and General Council of One Hundred and Fifty holy fathers and
bishops, who assembled in the city of Constantinople, in the day of the Emperor
Theodosius the Great. The assembling of them took place because of Macedonius,
Archbishop of the city of Constantinople, and his denial [of the existence] of the Holy
Spirit, for he said in the wickedness of his heart, “The Holy Spirit is a created thing, like all
other created things.” And another reason for the assembling of the Council was Basilius,
Bishop of the city of Benya, who said, “The Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit are
One Person, and One Being”; and another reason was Apollinarius, the infidel, who said,
“The only flesh which the Son took was the flesh which appertaineth absolutely to the
animal, and which is without a rational and understanding soul, and His Godhead was to
Him instead of soul and heart (understanding).” And these three having made this
shameful denial, the fathers gathered together to the emperor, and asked him to convene a
Council to consider the denial of these three infidels, and he assented to their words. And
straightway he sent a letter to Damalis, Archbishop of the city of Rome, and Meliton,
Archbishop of the city of Antioch, and to Cyril, Bishop of the city of Jerusalem, and he
commanded them to bring with them the bishops who were associated with them in their
countries. And these fathers, namely One Hundred and Fifty bishops, came and their
assembly took place in the city of Constantinople. Now the Archbishop of the city of
Rome did not come, but certain learned men came in his stead, and they brought with them
a letter written with his own hand. The head and chief of this Council was Timothy,
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and he called Macedonius, and commanded him to
expound his unclean Faith. And that infidel said, “The Holy Spirit is a created thing, like
all other created things.” And Timothy answered him and said, “With us the Holy Spirit is
the Spirit of God, and is uncreated, and we do not consider the life of God to be a created
thing; he who saith this hath no life in him. And thou sayest that He is created. Now, it is
better for thee to turn from this shameful denial, before thou art punished in Gahannum
and everlasting fire.” But Macedonius would neither hearken nor repent, and Timothy
anathematized him and excommunicated him, and he cut him off from his office, and
drove him forth. Then Timothy said unto Basilius, “Declare thy opinion, O evil and
unclean man!” And he said, “The Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit are One Person,
and One Being.” And Abba Timothy answered and said unto him, “If it be that the Three
Holy Ones are One Being, as thou sayest in thy madness, behold the mention of the Three
is destroyed, and thy Christian baptism is destroyed, for thou wast baptized in the Name of
the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and thou hast denied the Holy Three, as thou
sayest in thy madness. Did the Holy Three become incarnate, and suffer and die? Are the
words which are in the Holy Gospel to have no effect which say, The Son stood in the
Jordan, and the Spirit descended upon Him overshadowing Him, and the Father cried out
from heaven, saying, This is My Son, Whom I love, hear ye Him? It is best for thee to
repent of thy evil denial. Arius denieth the Son, and Macedonius denieth the Holy Spirit,
and thou art a partner with them, for thou deniest both the Son and the Holy Spirit.” But
328

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Sables would not repent, neither would he hearken unto him, and Timothy anathematized
him and excommunicated him, and cut him off [from his office], and drove him forth.
Then Timothy said unto Apollinarius, “Expound thy evil and shameful opinion.” And he
said in his madness, “The only flesh which the Son took was the flesh which appertaineth
absolutely to the animal, and which is without a rational and understanding soul, and [His
Godhead] was to Him in the place of a heart and soul [understanding].” And Timothy
answered and said unto him, “God the Word took flesh of our nature, and He became one
with us, so that He might deliver us; and if it be that the only flesh He took was that which
appertaineth absolutely to the animal, and is without a rational and understanding soul,
then it followeth that He cannot save the children of men, but only animals, according to
what thou sayest in thy madness. For the children of men shall not rise up in the day of the
resurrection, except as rational and understanding souls, and with them shall rise their
bodies, according to their deeds, whether it be for punishment, or whether it be for joy.
And, according to thy madness, shall the operation of His wisdom, and His Incarnation, be
destroyed? And how did He say concerning Himself, that He was not one with a rational
and understanding soul? It is better for thee to repent of this evil counsel, and this polluted
infidelity.” But Apollinarius would not turn, and he would not hearken, and Timothy
anathematized him and excommunicated him, and cut him off [from his office], with these
three (sic) others. And he excommunicated these three infidels by the mouths of all the
One Hundred and Fifty holy bishops of the Council, and he excommunicated those who
followed them, and those who believed their words. And then they added to the prayer of
the Faith the words, “We believe in the Holy Spirit,” on to the end. Now the Three
Hundred and Eighteen fathers had drawn up [the prayer of the Faith] without [these
words], as far as the place where it saith, “And there is no end of His kingdom.” And at
the place where they made the prayer of the Faith to end, these One Hundred and Fifty
fathers added the words “And there is no end of His kingdom.” Then they drew up at this
General Council a Canon, and subscribed it with their hands, and to this day all Christian
peoples observe their Law. Now the assembling of these One Hundred and Fifty fathers
and bishops took place in the five thousand eight hundred and eighty-second year since the
creation of the world. Salutation to the General Council of Constantinople.
And on this day also is celebrated the festival of the consecration of the church which was
built in the name of Saint Peter, the archbishop, who excommunicated Arius. Now he
became a martyr in the city of Alexandria, at the end of the reign of Diocletian, the infidel.
When Constantine began to reign he destroyed the houses of idols, and built churches, and
the believers built a church to the west of the city of Alexandria in the name of Saint Peter;
and it was consecrated as it were this day; and many signs and miracles took place therein.
And the church existed until the Muslims ruled in the land of Egypt. After they had ruled
for many days, the church of the west [of the city] became well known, and then it was
pulled down and laid in ruins; but the church of the blessed Peter, which is in the heavens,
is strong, and no injury shall ever come upon it. Salutation to the consecration of thy
church, O Peter.
And on this day also are commemorated the deaths of ‘Askenafer and his wife.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

329

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
YEKATIT 02
(February 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba Longinus, abbot of the monastery of Zegag, which is outside
the city of Alexandria. This saint was a man of Cilicia where he became a monk, and his
teacher, who loved Christ, was a righteous monk, who fled from the approbation of men.
At that time the abbot of their monastery died, and [the monks] wanted to appoint as abbot
the elder Abba Lucianus, his teacher. And Abba Lucianus took his disciple Longinus, and
they went forth from Cilicia, and came to a city of Syria, and they took up their abode in a
church. And our Lord Christ did not wish that their righteousness should be hidden, for a
city which is set upon a hill shall not be hidden; and God wrought many signs and wonders
by their hands, and they received praise and honor from men. And Saint Longinus went
forth from his teacher, by his advice, and came to the country of Egypt, and when he
arrived at the monastery of Zegag, the monks welcomed him with joy, and he dwelt in that
monastery until its abbot died. When the monks knew of the spiritual fight of the saint,
and his good qualities, and virtues, and righteousness, they appointed him abbot of the
monastery of Zegag. A few days later his teacher, the monk Abba Lucianus, arrived. And
they used to make roofs of boats (awnings?), and they lived on the work of their hands;
and they dwelt together, single-heartedly, for many days, and God performed many signs
and miracles by their hands. And then Abba Lucianus died. Now the assembling of the
Council of Chalcedon took place in the days of Marcianus, the infidel, and he sent
messengers into all the countries with the Book of the unclean Faith, which attributed to
Christ two Natures. And three of his envoys having come to the monastery of Zegag, and
given a copy of that Book to Abba Longinus, they said unto him, “The Emperor Marcianus
hath commanded that ye shall believe what is written in this Book.” And Saint Longinus
said, “I can do nothing without the advice of the holy fathers; come with me that we may
take counsel [with them].” And he brought the messengers of the emperor into the cave
wherein were the bodies of the holy elders, and he laid that Book upon them, and he said
unto them, “O my fathers, say ye not that ye have lain down in death, and are at peace.
Behold, they have brought this Book wherein is written the unclean Faith, which assigneth
to Christ two Natures. Do ye command me to subscribe thereto, and to believe its words,
or not? If ye do not tell me what I shall do, as God liveth, I will cast out your bones from
this place.” And a voice came forth from their bodies, and all the men heard it, saying,
“Forsake thou not the True Faith of our fathers the Apostles, and of our fathers the Three
Hundred and Eighteen; and follow not the unclean Book, and remove it from our bodies.”
And when the envoys of the emperor heard these words they marveled exceedingly, and
fear and great trembling fell upon them, and they did not return to the emperor, but they
shaved the hair of their heads, and became monks in that monastery; and they lived there
for many years and died there. And Saint Longinus having finished his good fight, at a
ripe old age, and pleased God, died in peace, and received a crown of martyrdom.
And on this day also died Abba Pawli (Paul) who was the greatest of all the desert monks,
and the equal of the angels who keep vigil. This saint was a native of the city of
Alexandria, and his name was Pawli (Paul), and he had a brother whose name was Peter,
and their father was a rich man. And the multitude of his possessions, of gold, and silver,
and costly apparel, was countless. And when their parents died, and the days of their
330

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
mourning for them were ended, the two brothers began to divide their inheritance from
their father; and Pawli’s (Paul’s) brother Peter took the larger share, and assigned to Pawli
(Paul) the lesser share. And the heart of Pawli (Paul) was sad about this, and he said unto
his brother, “Why dost thou not give me my share of the inheritance of my father?” And
Peter answered and said unto him, “Thou art a young man, and will squander thy money,
and I will take care of it for thee until thou art grown up.” Thereupon Pawli (Paul) became
wroth, and the two brothers quarreled together, and they went to the governor, so that he
might do justice to each. And as they were going along, they met a dead man, and he was
ready for the tomb, and men were carrying him on a bier, and many men were following
him and making lamentation for him. And straightway Saint Pawli (Paul) called to one of
those who were following the dead man, and said unto him, “Who is this that hath died this
day?” And the man said unto him, “He is a very well-known man, my son. He who died
this day was a rich man, and he lived delicately, and possessed gold and silver, and behold,
he hath left all this, and he goeth naked to the grave, in a sea of sins, by the road on which
he shall never return. And now, O my son, it is meet for us to fight for the salvation of our
souls, for we know not when we shall die. But, blessed is the man who hath dominion and
money in this world! And let him abandon riches if he would received great honor in the
heavenly Jerusalem, the city of all the saints.” When Abba Pawli (Paul) heard these words
he cried out in his heart, saying, “What have I to do with the possessions of this fleeting
world, which after a few days I must leave, and depart naked?” Then he turned to his
brother, and said unto him, “Let us go back together to our house, for from this time
onward I will never speak again about money.” Then he fled from his brother, and went
outside the city, and he went into a grave and sat down inside it, and for three days and
three nights he prayed and entreated God to guide him into the [right] way. And his
brother passed many days in going round about through all the villages seeking for him,
but he found him not; and he sorrowed for him with a very great sorrow. And whilst Saint
Pawli (Paul) was sitting in that tomb for three days, he did not remember food and drink,
and fear and terror did not assail him, for the might of God overshadowed him. And on the
fourth day God sent His angel to him, and he caught him up from the grave, and carried
him into the Inner Desert, towards the east, and he set him down in that place by the side of
a well of water; and then the angel embraced him, and went up into [heaven]. And Saint
Abba Pawli (Paul) found a cave wherein wild beasts lived, and he entered therein. And he
made himself garments of palm fiber, and put them on, and he prayed, saying, “O my Lord
Jesus Christ, Son of the Living God, keep me, and deliver me from the hand of the Enemy,
who is merciless. And let Thy mercy come upon me, and strengthen Thou me, so that I
may finish my fight, through Thy good pleasure, O King of all the generations of men, for
to Thee belong power and glory for ever.” And he lived in that cave for eighty years, and
he never saw a man. And his apparel was [made of] cloth made of palm fiber. And God
used to send unto him daily at eventide, a raven, which had with him half a loaf of bread,
and he would give it to Pawli (Paul). And when God wished to make manifest the holiness
and righteousness of Pawli (Paul), He sent an angel to the great father Abba Anthony, who
thought in his heart that he was the first who dwelt in the desert. And the angel came to
Abba Anthony and said unto him, “In the Inner Desert, distant from thee two days’
journey, there is a man for whose feet the men of the world are not meet to be a footstool.
Through his prayers the world is kept in a right course, and the earth giveth its fruit.
Through him the dew falleth on the earth, and the sun riseth upon all the sinners of the
earth, and because of his goodness God beareth all the creation of the children of men.”
And when Abba Anthony heard these words he rose up, and went into the Inner Desert,
331

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
believing that God was with him, and that He would make straight his road. And he found
the footprints of a man, and the footprints of many wild beasts, and sheep, and cattle, about
the footprints of the man, [and he followed them] till he arrived at his cave; and he heard
the holy man singing in his cave. And Abba Anthony took up a stone, and knocked at the
door of the cave therewith. And when Saint Pawli (Paul) heard him knocking, he thought
that it was some work of Satan, and he took up a large stone, and set it against the end of
the bolt, which fastened the door of his cave. When Anthony heard [this] he cried out, and
said, “I have sought and it was given unto me to find, I have asked and I have received, I
have knocked and it hath been opened to me.” And straightway Abba Pawli (Paul) opened
the door to him, and brought him in, and each embraced the other with a spiritual embrace,
and they prayed together and sat down. And Anthony said unto him, “What is thy name, O
my father?” And the blessed elder Abba Pawli (Paul) answered, and said unto him, “If
thou dost not know my name, why hast thou journeyed [to] this place?” And at that
moment God opened the heart of Anthony, and he said unto him, “Blessed am I that I was
held worthy to see the second Pawli (Paul).” And whilst they were talking together about
the greatness of God, behold a raven came at eventide, and dropped down to the saint a
whole bread cake. And Abba Pawli (Paul) said unto Abba Anthony, “Now do I know that
thou art a man of God. Behold, I have been living in this desert until to-day eighty years,
and each day God hath sent unto me half a bread-cake, and behold to-day He hath sent thy
food.” And after this they rose up together, and prayed until the star in the west appeared,
when they sat down and ate. And after they had eaten they rose up and prayed and
glorified God until the dawn broke. And when they saw the light of the dawn and that the
sun had risen, they embraced each other. And Anthony said unto Pawli (Paul), “O my
father, where hast thou received the Holy Mysteries during all the days wherein thou hast
been living in this desert?” And Saint Abba Pawli (Paul) answered and said unto him,
“God sent to me His angel, and he administered to me the Holy Mysteries each day
preceding the Sabbath, and on the First Day of the week, and then he went up to heaven;
and he worketh for me each day.” And Anthony said unto him, “I want thee to inform me
about the garb of the monks--will it increase on earth, or not?” And the blessed man
smiled, and uttered a cry of grief. And Anthony said unto him, “When I see thee smiling, I
smile also, and rejoice thereat; but when thou utterest a cry of grief I feel sad.” And Saint
Pawli (Paul) answered and said unto him, “These mountains and deserts shall become like
the habitation of doves, and God shall gather together into them His chosen ones from
among all the monks; and this name of ‘chosen one’ shall change, and their name shall be
‘monks.’ And they shall rejoice many days, and God shall remove them before [the
coming of] wrath. After them there shall rise up a generation of men who will neither hear
nor submit to their teachers, and who will not keep vigil at night for their soul’s sake.
Then shall God be wroth with the mountains and deserts, and He will despoil them of the
wicked folk who have neither heart nor Law; and the mountains and the deserts shall be
waste for many days. But the memorial of the saints shall not perish. And God shall pour
compassion into the hearts of other men, and they shall go to the mountains and deserts,
and dwell in them, [and they shall be inhabited] a second time. And Satan shall go into the
mountains (or, monasteries), and cause war in their midst, and they shall cast aside the
garb of the monk, and shall go down into the world, for they shall not find the strength of
the love of God, and they shall not endure therein; for it is written, ‘By patience ye shall
make yourselves to possess your souls’ (Isaiah xxx,15).” And Anthony said unto him,
“Blessed be the day, O my father, wherein I was held worthy to see thy face, O blessed
Abba Pawli (Paul).” And Saint Abba Pawli (Paul) said unto him, “Rise up now and depart
332

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to thy habitation, and bring with thee the garment which Constantine gave unto
Athanasius, the Archbishop, and which Abba Athanasius put upon thee, so that thou
mayest bury my body therein.” And Anthony marveled at his words and his mention of
the garment of the archbishop, and he believed all the prophecies, which he had prophesied
to him. And Saint Abba Pawli (Paul) said unto him, “Make haste, and stand not, for the
time of my going forth is nigh, as unto all men.” When Anthony heard this he was greatly
frightened, and he wept; and he went out from him, and journeyed for two days and two
nights, until he came to his abode. And he took the garment and went back, and as he was
on the road he saw Abba Bula (Pawli) (Paul) and the company of the angels singing
praises in the air, and they said, “Glory be to God.” And they said also, “Peace be unto
thee, O thou chosen one of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, thou blessed father, Abba Pawli
(Paul), thou man of God; the angels rejoice with thee, for thou shalt rejoice in the kingdom
of the heavens. Darkness hath left thee and they shall take thee to the country of light;
sorrow hath left thee, and they shall take thee to the joy, which is forever. Blessed art thou
in thy generation, O thou Pawli (Paul), the desert monk, thou man of God, thou Pawli
(Paul), the desert monk.” And when they had said these words of praise they disappeared.
And the blessed Anthony said, “This is the soul of my father Abba Pawli (Paul) kneeling
on his knees with his face [to the ground], and his hands were spread out like a cross. And
he took him up and he seemed to be alive, and he covered him over, and wept over him,
saying, “Remember me, O my father, in the habitations of heaven wherein thou wilt
dwell.” Then Saint Anthony took him, and wrapped his body up in that garment, and he
took the Book and fulfilled over him the Canon of the Law of the Church, and he prayed
over him three times, and read over him the Four Gospels. And he took up his garment
made of the hair of a mule, and he wondered what he should do with it, for he had no
digging tool with him. and straightway there came unto him two lions, and they bowed
low before the body of Saint Pawli (Paul), and they saluted him. And Abba Anthony was
dismayed and was afraid when he saw the lions, and the lions bent their heads to Anthony,
as if they were asking him a question, and they licked his feet as if they had known him
before, and they made signs to him as if they would say unto him, “Where shall we dig a
grave for him?” And Abba Anthony understood their signs, and he measured out for them
a space as long as the body of Pawli (Paul), and he showed them how deep the pit was to
be, and the two lions dug, one towards the head and the other towards the feet, for a space
of four cubits. And Anthony made a sign to them and said unto them, “This is enough for
you”; and the lions came up out of the grave, and they crouched before Abba Anthony as if
they would say, “Forgive us, and remember us, and bless us.” And he blessed them, and
they went away from him, and Saint Anthony wrapped up the body of Saint Abba Pawli
(Paul) and buried him. And after this he took the head-cloth, and the pallet, of Abba Pawli
(Paul), and his garment made of mule’s hair, like a son who inheriteth the possessions of
his father. And he set a mark on the place where his grave was, and he journeyed on foot
and departed from the east until he arrived at the city of Alexandria, facing the west. And
he went into the presence of Abba Athanasius the Archbishop, and he told him what had
happened to Saint Abba Pawli (Paul). And when the archbishop heard the story of the
saint he rejoiced and took the garment of the blessed Abba Pawli (Paul), and laid it up by
him; and he wore it three times a year, namely on the festival of the Epiphany, on the
festival of the Resurrection of the Redeemer, and on the festival of the Great Ascension.
And the archbishop sent priests, and deacons, and men, with Abba Anthony, and carts with
them to fetch the body of Saint Abba Pawli (Paul). And they went round about in the
mountains for many days without finding the grave of the saint, for it was hidden from
333

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them [by the sand]. And Saint Abba Pawli (Paul) appeared unto the Archbishop Abba
Athanasius, and said unto him, “Send a messenger to bring back the men, and let them not
labor [in vain], for God doth not wish any man to see me until the appearance of the Lord
Christ”; and the archbishop sent a messenger and brought back the men. And one day God
willed to make manifest the glory of the Abba Pawli’s (Paul’s) cloak of mule’s hair. And
at that time a certain young man of the city of Alexandria, who was a Christian, died.
“Now believe me, O Christian folk, I, your father Atanasius, took this garment of mule’s
hair which belonged to the blessed Abba Pawli (Paul), and laid it upon the dead man, and
he rose up straightway. I, Athanasius, who have been appointed chief in the Church, saw
this with my own eyes. And I, Isidore the bishop, was a witness of this thing. And I,
Anthony, who was first appointed a priest by the hand of Abba Athanasius, am a witness
of this thing, and I have subscribed this statement.” And two or three other men testified
that this was true. And the story of this miracle was noised about throughout all the
countries of Egypt, and in the city of Alexandria, and all men marveled, and glorified God,
Who worketh miracles by His saints. Salutation to Abba Pawli (Paul).
And on this day Thomas made manifest a miracle when he went forth to preach where our
Lord commanded him to go. And when he drew nigh thereto, and had come within two
stadia of the city, he turned aside from the road and saw by chance a dead young man, and
his appearance was very godly. And the apostle said, “My Lord, was it that I might
experience this trial that Thou didst bring me hither? But Thy Will be done.” And having
said this he prayed much for the dead man, and straightway there came forth from the side
of a stone a great serpent which lashed the ground with its tail, and cried out with a loud
voice, saying, “What have I to do with thee, O apostle of Christ, thou hast come to annul
my work?” And the apostle said unto him, “Yea, speak.” And the serpent said, “There
was a beautiful woman [who came] from the vineyard, and I saw her and loved her. Then I
found this young man kissing her, and consorting with her on the day of the Sabbath; but it
is unnecessary for me to describe before thee all the wickedness, which he committed. I
knew that he was an associate of Christ, and therefore I killed him.” And the Satan who
ruled over the serpent told the apostle all the evil, which he used to do to the children of
men. Then the apostle anathematized him in the Name of Jesus Christ, and commanded
him to withdraw the poison from the [dead] man. And straightway the serpent blew
himself out, and burst asunder and died, and the young man leaped up and embraced the
feet of the apostle and recovered. And in this place the apostle made the people to believe,
and he built them a church. Then the apostle went into the city with the young man whom
he had raised from the dead, and as they were standing and talking to the people of that
place, a young ass came and stood before him, and he opened his mouth and said, “O
associate of Christ, and apostle of the Most High, who knoweth the things which are
hidden, thou companion of the Son of God, come return thou to Him that sent thee, God.
Get up, and mount upon my back, and rest until thou enterest the city.” And when the
apostle heard him he marveled exceedingly, and he praised God, and said unto the ass, “To
what race dost thou belong that thou speaketh such deep mysteries?” And the ass said
unto him, “I am a descendant of the offspring of the ass which was in the service of
Balaam, and the ass whereon thy Lord and Teacher rode was descended from him, and was
my father. Now as for me, I have been sent to give thee rest and for thee to mount upon”;
and the apostle refused to mount upon him. And when the ass had made many entreaties
to him, the apostle mounted upon him, and he came to the gates of the city with many
people following him; and he alighted from the ass, and said unto him, “Depart, and take
heed whither thou departest,” and straightway the ass fell down and died. And those who
334

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
saw this were dismayed, and they said unto the apostle, “Make him to live and raise him
up.” And the apostle said unto them, “I could raise him up by the power of my God, but it
is better for him so”; and he commanded them to dig a hole in the ground, and to bury him,
and then he gave them the salutation of peace and departed from them. Salutation to
Thomas.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 03
(February 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father and ascetic, the blessed Jacob, the monk. He rejected the
world in his youth, and went and lived in a cave for fifteen yeas, and he fought the fight,
with long fasting, and prayer, and vigil by night, and prostrations without ceasing; and he
never went out from his cell, or entered a city, for a period of fifteen years, and he never
looked upon the face of a woman. And certain evil men who were among the followers of
Diabolus made a plan against him, and they caused a certain harlot to go to the saint, and
she went into his cell to him, and she made lewd gestures before him, and invited him to
work sin with her. And the saint warned her about the fire of Gahannum, and the
punishment, which is forever, and through him she repented, and fought the spiritual fight
and pleased God. And after this Satan made a plot against him, and he entered into the
heart of a daughter of a certain nobleman of the city, and he cast her down on the ground,
and rolled her over, and Satan put into the heart of her father [the idea] that no one could
heal her except Jacob the monk in the cell. And her father took her, and brought her to the
saint, and he asked him to heal her by his prayers; and the saint prayed over her, and she
was healed straightway, but her father was afraid to take her away at once, saying that the
Satan might come back to her. And the father left her with the saint, and her brother who
was a little boy with her, and departed. Then Satan took up war against the saint by night
and by day, and at length he made him to fall into sin with her. And having fallen into sin
with her he became afraid lest the sin should be made manifest, and that the people would
kill him because of it, and he killed the woman and her brother. Thereupon Satan cast
despair in his heart, and he went forth from his cell to go into the world. And He Who
desireth not the death of a sinner had compassion upon him, and He sent a righteous monk
unto him, and the holy man found him on the road as he was journeying along, and he
welcomed him and embraced him. When he saw that Jacob was sad and sorry, he asked
him, saying, “What hath happened to thee? What maketh thee sad?” And Jacob told him
everything, which had happened, how he had fallen through that maiden, and how he had
killed her and her brother. And that righteous monk said unto him, “Fear not, be strong,
and cut not off hope, for God is compassionate and merciful”; and then he laid upon him
fasting, and prayer, and prostrations. And Jacob went back and entered his cell, and shut
himself in, and he endured great toil and tribulation; and he fasted frequently and prayed,
and kept vigil and made many prostrations. And he always ate grass, and the herbs of the
earth, and he sorrowed in his heart, and was sad, and said, “Will God accept me and
forgive me my sin?” And he continued to fight, and repented deeply for forty years. And
God willed to reveal to him that He had accepted his repentance, and He brought a great
335

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
famine upon the city that year, and said unto the Bishop of that city, “The famine will only
pass away through the prayer of Jacob, the monk who is in a pit.” And the bishop rose up
straightway, and took with him the priests and people of the city, and they came to Saint
Jacob, and asked him to pray on their behalf, that God would have mercy upon them and
bring down rain. And he refused, saying, “I am a sinner and a wrongdoer, and I have
provoked God to wrath with my sins”; and the bishop told him what God had said
concerning him. And straightway he submitted to the bishop, and he went out with the
people and he prayed, and wept, saying, “They think that Jacob is a man,” and his prayer
was with tears. And he said unto God, “How can I show my unclean face before Thy
holiness, O God? How can I lift up my face which is blackened with much sin to the
heaven of Thy holiness?” And he prayed a long time, and before he finished his prayer
much rain fell, and he knew that God had accepted his prayer and his repentance, and had
forgiven him his sin. And after this he doubled his fasting, and his prayers, and vigils, and
prostrations, and he admonished himself, saying, “Fight and take care that thou dost not
fall a second time.” And he ended his days at a good old age, and he pleased God and died
in peace. Salutation to Jacob.
And on this day also took place the translation of the body of Abba Ephraim, the Syrian.
Salutation to the translation of thy body, O Ephraim.
And on this day also took place the death of Abba Ebelo, the chief of the anchorites,
through whose virtues flourished the fruit of the Faith. When Athanasius, Archbishop of
Alexandria, returned, Basil, Bishop of Caesarea, came to him, and the two of them passed
the night in the church of ‘Abukir. And as they were talking together about the saints who
were in the religious houses of Egypt, the father archbishop said, “Abba Pachomius [is the
greatest saint],” and Basil said, “Abba Anthony, and Abba Amoni [are the greatest
saints].” And whilst they were talking thus, and wishing to know rightly [who was the
greatest saint], Abba Athanasius saw a vision on the fifth day of Yakatit, at midnight, of a
great tree, [the roots of] which reached as far as the river, and the branches of which
reached to heaven; and many men sheltered themselves under the branches thereof; and in
the midst thereof was a Tabot (altar). And whilst he was rendered silent by the vision,
Michael came down from heaven, and said unto him, “Tell this vision to Basil.” And Basil
saw even as Athanasius saw, the tree and the altar and the angels. And Michael interpreted
the matter to them, saying, “The tree which ye saw is the monastery of Abba Ebelo, which
is built on the border of Egypt, and the branches thereof are the monks. And the altar is the
church, which the angels visit, and it is the similitude of Peter because it destroyeth [evil]
spirits. And a certain prefect of the city of Alexandria heard the story of Abba Ebelo, and
he entreated the archbishop to send him to him so that he might receive a blessing from
him. And the father archbishop sent him with seven monks, that is to say, Isidore, and
John the Less, and Abba Besoy, and Abba Amoni, and Victor, and Agrinicus, and Abba
Kalnas. And Abba Ebelo rose up and went, and met them with joy, and the prefect who
had come with the brethren, who was one-eyed, embraced Abba Ebelo, and showed [him]
his eye, and cried out, saying, “O bright star in the world!” Then the prefect said unto
Abba Ebelo, “My wife labored with leprosy; she is under thy garb (i.e. she is a nun), and
may the grace which hath found me find her.” And Abba Ebelo said unto her, “Healing
shall be to her!” And she found health. One day Abba Ebelo stood up among the monks,
and said unto them, “Let each one of you be certain that our Redeemer will come with His
disciples to make us to know where the site of the church is to be.” And when it became
daylight [on the morrow], Jesus Christ came, and His disciples and His angels were with
336

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Him, and He showed them where to lay the foundations of the building of the church. And
Abba Ebelo exhorted his sons to be perfect in every good work, and to dwell in love; and
whilst he was exhorting them his face changed, and his whole body burned, and light
beamed forth from his face, as from that of an angel of God. And when his sons were
afraid he said unto them, “Fear ye not, I am saying farewell unto you.” And having said
this his soul was caught up, and a beautiful perfume spread itself about, and straightway
his eye were opened, and he said, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, help me, and receive my soul
to Thee”; and having said this he delivered up his soul into the hand of God.
And on this day also died Zenon, the worker of wonders. This saint having gone into the
sanctuary (i.e. the temple) of Jerusalem to pray, came out and went to Imahus (Emmaus),
to a holy elder, and after they had saluted each other they sat down and began to tell stories
of the great deeds of God until the sixth hour. And there was in that city a certain believer,
who used to visit the elder [and take him] bread and water. One day when he was carrying
his food to him, one told him that his son was dead, and he took him and wrapped him up
in cloth and laid him in a coffer, on the top of which he placed the elder’s food; and his
wife followed him. When he came to the elder he found Abba Zenon with him, and he set
the coffer before them, and asked them to pray. And they talked together, and one said,
“Do thou pray,” and the other said, “Do thou pray”; and the elder made Abba Zenon to
pray. And he began his prayer thus: “O Lord, Sustainer of the Universe, compassionate
and merciful, these are the things which Thy servants the poor offer unto Thee as their
First-fruits.” And with the end of these words the dead child rose up, and wept in the
coffer. Then the father of the child cast himself down at the feet of Abba Zenon, and he
said unto him, “Forgive me, O my father, for speaking unto thee, but this my son, who was
dead, hath risen up through thy prayer.” And Abba Zenon feared the adulation of men, and
he said unto him, “O my son, reveal this thing to no man whatsoever until I die.” And he
fled from that place without eating, and returned to his own habitation, and after fighting
many spiritual fights he died. Salutation to Zenon.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 04
(February 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy apostle Agabus became a martyr. The Lord chose this disciple among
the Seventy-two disciples whom He chose and sent forth to preach before His Passion.
And this man was filled with the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, for he was with the Twelve
Apostles in the upper room of Zion. And God gave him the gift of prophecy, even as it
saith concerning him in the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, that he took the girdle of
Paul and bound his own feet therewith, and said, “Thus saith the Holy Spirit: The Jews
shall take the man who is the owner of this girdle, and shall bind him thus in Jerusalem”
(Acts xxi, II); and this prophecy was fulfilled. Then he preached with the Apostles the
preaching of the holy, and life-giving Gospel, and he went into many cities preaching, and
teaching, and pointing out the way of God; and he converted many Jews and Greeks to the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he purified them with life-giving, Christian
337

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
baptism. And the Jews seized him in Jerusalem, when he was alone, and they beat him
severely and made him suffer. Then they put a rope about his neck and dragged him
outside the city, and stoned him with stones until he delivered up his soul. And
straightway there descended upon him a light which appeared to be like a pillar, and
reached from his body to heaven, and all the people were looking upon him. And God
opened the heart of a Jewish woman wherein there was no evil, or enmity, or deceit, or
jealousy, as [is usual] with the cursed Jews, and she kept the Law of the Torah, and she
said, “This is a righteous man, and for this reason light hath descended upon him, and God
hath magnified him.” And she cried out, saying, “I am a Christian, and I believe in the
God of this saint.” And her also they stoned with stones, and she died and was buried with
the saint in one grave. Salutation to Agabus.
And on this day died Abba Zachariah, whose works were excellent, and whose spiritual
fights were very great. When the soul of this man was about to go forth from his body,
Abba Moses said unto him, “What dost thou see?” And he said unto him, “It is better for
me that I keep silence.” And when his soul went forth Abba Isidore saw the heavens
opened, and [the angels] said, “Rejoice, O my son Zachariah, for behold the gates of the
kingdom of heaven are opened unto thee”; and thus he died. Salutation to Zachariah.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 05
(February 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Akrepinu (Akrepos), the tenth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This father was a God-fearing man, and he was holy and pure; and he
was a priest in the city of Alexandria. And when father Claudian, the archbishop who
preceded him, died, the people of the city of Alexandria chose this father and made him
archbishop. And having been set over the Church of God on the throne of Mark the
evangelist, he followed a good course of life like the Apostles, and he preached and taught
the Christian Faith, and the life-giving Law, and he watched the people with his eyes, and
shepherded his flock and helped them. He took no trouble to become possessed of one
silver dirham, or one dinar, and he only ate because he was hungry, and he dressed only to
protect his body against cold and heat. And he read the Scriptures frequently to his people,
and he taught them, both great and small, and he kept vigil and prayed for them all; and he
continued this strife for twelve years and he pleased God and died in peace. Salutation to
‘Akrepinu (‘Akrepos), who succeeded Claudian.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Besoy, who was called “Peter.” This holy
man came from Upper Egypt, from the city of ‘Akhim (Akhmim). In the days of his early
manhood he used to do works of abomination, and to eat and drink luxuriously. When
God chose him He brought upon him a severe illness, and he well-nigh died and delivered
up his spirit, and He showed him the places of punishment, and the great deep pits of hell,
and he saw men clothed in shining apparel, and in their hands they had the body of a man
which they tore into four pieces. And they said unto Besoy, “Thus will they do unto every
338

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
man who stealeth the possessions of men.” When he heard this word he was sorrowful in
his heart, and he wept a bitter weeping, and his soul returned to his body, and he lifted up
his eyes to heaven and said, “O my Lord and God, if Thou wilt heal me of this sickness, I
will repent of this my sin, and I will worship Thee with all my heart, and from this time
forward I will never look at a woman again.” And straightway God healed him of his
sickness, and he rose up and went to Dabra Banwayet, and the monks counseled him, and
they arrayed him in the garb of the monk. And he fought a great fight with fasting, and
prayer, and vigils for many years, until his fame was heard of throughout Egypt; and he
excelled among many saints, and he composed many Homilies and Admonitions, and
Teachings for the monks and for the laity. And he fasted a month at a time, and neither ate
bread nor drank water; and continued to fight the fight in this manner for a period of five
and thirty years. And he used to stand up all night in prayer. And the works of men were
manifest before him, whether righteous or sinners; and after this he became a little sick and
he died in peace. Salutation to Besoy who was called Peter.
And on this day died the holy father Nob, the owner of the fan (?) of gold. Salutation to
Nob with his fan (?) of gold, the driver away of wild beasts.
And on this day also died Abba Eblo, who was like unto an angel of God. And behold we
have written his history in the section for the twenty-fifth day of the month of Tekemt.
Salutation to Abba ‘Eblo.
And on this day also took place the translation of the bodies of the forty-nine elders
(monks) who became martyrs in the desert of Scete, in the monastery of Abba Macarius.
Salutation to the translation of the holy bones to the cave, which was built for them under
the care of Benyami.
And on this day also died Saint ‘Abulidis, Archbishop of the city of Rome. And behold his
history is written in the section for the sixth day of this (sic) month. Salutation to
‘Abulidis.
And on this day also the holy father Abba ‘Ebelo, the shepherd, became [a martyr]. This
saint was shepherd of sheep, and he gave himself to Satan in his youth. He used to commit
fornication, and steal, and commit murder, and there was no kind of sin which he did not
commit, for he committed them all, up to the age of forty years, and performed every kind
of work of Satan. One day whilst he was sitting in the desert at mid-day, and wanting to
cut the hair of his sheep, Satan cast a thought into his heart, and he said, “Behold, I have
sinned from my youth up until now. I have fulfilled everything, which Satan commanded
me to do. I have left no sin whatsoever in this world uncommitted. There is, however, one
sinful deed left me to do, for I want to rip open the belly of a woman who is with child, so
that I may see how the child lieth in her womb.” And as he was thinking this thought in
his heart, behold a woman who was with child, and was very near her time for bringing
forth her child, was walking in the desert during the hot period of the day. When he saw
her he rose up straightway, and without mercy seized the hair of her head, and threw her on
the ground, and took a knife and ripped up her belly, and saw how the child was lying in
her womb. And after this the child died, and his mother died in great agony. And when
the shepherd saw the great sin which he had committed, he was exceedingly sorry, and he
rent his garments forthwith and cast dust upon his head, and he cried out and wept bitterly
and said, “Woe to me, for I have committed the great and unforgivable sin.” And
339

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
straightway he left his flocks scattered about, and he took a rod in his hand, and he walked
about, weeping bitterly, until he came to the desert of Scete. And he did not mingle with
the elder monks, and he did not tell them what he had done, but he went into the Inner
Desert, a very long way from them, a distance of ten stadia. He had no bread with him to
eat, and he had no abode wherein to dwell, but he ate with the beasts and he drank with
them. And he used to cry out by night and by day unceasingly, saying, “I have sinned, I
am a sinner, I have done evil. Forgive me, Thou art God, the good Father, for there is no
man without sin; and God is not without mercy.” And he continued to fight in this way for
forty years, and his body became dried up and black through the dew of heaven, and the
heat of the summer. And when he entered upon the fortieth year of his abode in the desert,
he heard a voice, saying, “Be strong and of good courage, for behold thy sin is forgiven
thee, and the murder of the woman is forgiven thee; but the murder of the child is not
forgiven thee up to this present.” And God in His mercy said unto him so that he might
not become apathetic, and might not fall into sin a second time. And having heard these
words he increased his bitter weeping, and his fighting until that year was ended. And
towards the end of the fortieth year, when only three days remained from its end, the angel
of God appeared unto a desert monk who lived far from him, in the desert, a distance of
twelve stadia, and who had dwelt there in the desert for seventy years without seeing a
man. And the angel of God said unto him, “Get thee outside thy desert, and thou shalt find
an old man, and when he hath confessed to thee everything which he hath done, comfort
him, and say unto him, ‘Behold, all thy sin is forgiven thee, and also the murder of the
child; thy sin is forgiven thee.’” And the desert monk rose up and departed, and he went to
the old man and talked to him, and they embraced each other, and Abba ‘Ebelo wept
unceasingly. And the desert monk said unto him, “Tell me what thou hast done, and why
thou didst come hither”; and he told him everything, which had happened to him, and how
he had ripped up the belly of the woman. And the desert monk said unto him, “Fear not,
for thy sin is remitted to thee.” And the desert monk said unto him, “Whence dost thou
receive the Offering?” And the shepherd said unto him, “O my holy father, as God liveth,
during the whole of the forty years which I have been living in this desert I have seen no
man save thyself.” And the desert monk said unto him, “O my beloved father, rejoice, for
tomorrow the angel of God shall come unto thee, and shall administer the Offering unto
thee, at dawn.” And when the morning of the day preceding the Sabbath had come there
arose the smell of a perfume which was exceedingly sweet, the like whereof had never
been smelt before, and Abba ‘Ebelo said unto the desert monk, “O my father, my soul
craveth to depart through fear.” And when he had said this, he saw the angel of God
standing by him in the form of a monk, and his face was shining very brightly, and he sang
a psalm, saying, “I was afflicted and God delivered me. Return, my soul, to thy rest; God
hath helped thee. For he hath delivered my soul from death, and mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from slipping, as God was well-pleased in the country of the living” (Psalm cxvi, 6
ff.). When Abba ‘Ebelo the shepherd heard this, he fell down upon the ground, and was as
one dead through fear. Then the angel, in the form of a monk, put forth his hand, and lifted
him up, and the shepherd saw that the angel in the form of a man was strong of heart, and
he received the Holy and Divine Mysteries which had come down from heaven from the
hand of the shining angel, with great reverence, and with fear and trembling. And the
angel of God ascended into heaven. And when Abba ‘Ebelo had received the Offering
from the hand of the angel, his body became white like snow, and he and the desert monk
rejoiced, and glorified God until the evening. And the shepherd Abba Ebeloy did not cease
to pray as of old, saying, “I have sinned seventy times seven; I have done evil, forgive me,
340

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
for Thou art God, and the Good Father; there is no man without sin, and God is not without
mercy.” And they passed that day, which was the First Day of the week, in glorifying
God, and they did so until night, and then an exceeding sweet smell of a fragrant perfume
made itself apparent, and it was stronger than before. And the desert monk said unto Abba
‘Ebelo, “O my brother, wash in a little water, for this is the hour wherein thou wilt receive
for my sake [the reward of thy] toil. Rejoice, my brother, for thou shalt rest now”; and
straightway the angel of God administered unto them the Holy Mysteries; and Abba ‘Ebelo
the shepherd died forthwith. And the angels took up his soul and flew up with it into the
heights, and the desert monk wept for him, saying, “What shall I do? I am an old man, and
I cannot carry thy body, and I have nothing wherewith to dig [a grave for thee].” And
straightway two lions came and crouched by the body of Abba ‘Ebelo, and they made
signs with their heads to the desert monk, as much as to say unto him, “What shall we
do?” And he made a sign to them, and they dug a grave for him, and they carried Abba
‘Ebelo to it, and buried him as men would have done; and the desert monk was sorry, and
he said, “Father, let me find someone to bury my body!” And a voice came unto him
saying, “I will bury thy body. There are left only three days before thou shalt have peace.
Behold, I will send unto thee three men; tell them all the story of the fight of Abba ‘Ebelo,
the shepherd, so that they may tell it unto others, that those who have fallen into sin must
not despair of the mercy of God.” And on the following day three men came unto him,
and he told them the history of the fight of Abba ‘Ebelo, the shepherd, and they marveled
exceedingly, and they wrote down everything and they remained with him until the third
day. And then the desert monk prayed and delivered his soul into the hand of God. And
the two lions came and dug a grave for him near that of Abba ‘Ebelo, and they buried him
as if they had been man, and then departed. And the three men followed them until they
brought them to the monastery of Abba Macarius, of the desert of Scete; and they told the
monks everything, which had happened. And the monks marveled exceedingly and they
wrote down the story of the fight of Abba ‘Ebelo, the shepherd, and they used to read it
aloud each Sunday; now his death took place on the fifth day of Yakatit. Salutation to
Abba Ebeloy, whom Satan tripped up. Salutation to Abba ‘Ebelo, the teacher of the Law.
And on this day also took place the deaths of Banwa, and Bula, and ‘Amoni and ‘Esia, the
father and mother of Abba ‘Ebelo.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 06
(February 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And on this day they raised up the body of the holy and honorable Abulidis, Archbishop of
the city of Rome, the teacher of all the ends of the world. This saint was a nobleman by
birth, and a perfect, and learned man, and God chose him to be Archbishop of the city of
Rome, after Abba Eucheius, in the first year of the archiepiscopate of Claudian, in the city
of Alexandria. And this father used to teach his people and protect them against the
opinions of the pagans, and strengthen them in the Faith of God. And the fame of him was
heard of by the Emperor Claudius, the infidel, and he seized Saint Abulidis and beat him
341

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
very severely. When he was weary of torturing him, he tied a heavy stone to this feet, and
cast him into the Red Sea on the fifth day of Yakatit. And on the following day, that is to
say the sixth day of Yakatit, as it were today, the body of the saint was found floating on
the water, and there was a stone on his feet. And one of the believers took it up out of the
water, and brought it into the house, and he wrapped it up in wrappings of great price; and
this story was noised abroad in all the city of Rome and the district round about it. And the
emperor sought to burn the body in the fire, but the man with whom it was hid did not
reveal it. And this saint composed many homilies, some on the True Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and some on the Incarnation of the Son of God in the nature of man, and
some of them dealt with Doctrine (or Dogma), and some contained Admonitions to do the
good pleasure of God. And he drew up eight and thirty Canons on the Law of the Church,
and these are to be found in our own churches, and in all the churches of all Christian
peoples. Salutation to the bringing up of the body of Abba Abulidis from out of the sea.
And on this day also became martyrs the following saints: ‘Abukir, and John, and three
virgins, and their mother, whose names were Theodora, which is, being interpreted, “Gift
of God,” and Theophana, which is being interpreted, “Faith of God,” and Theodosia,
which is, being interpreted, “Praise of God,” and Athanasia, which is, being interpreted,
“Life which dieth not.” And Saint ‘Abukir was a monk, and he was devoted to God, and
was a fighter from his youth up, and John was a soldier in the Imperial Army, and they
were men of the city of Alexandria. And then they dwelt in the city of Antioch and,
together with their mother and the virgins who were with them, they confessed our Lord
Jesus Christ before the Emperor Diocletian, who asked them whence they came. And they
said unto him, “From the city of Alexandria,” and he commanded that they should be taken
thither. And when they came to the city of Alexandria, and stood up before the governor,
and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ, he tortured them severely; and when he was tired of
torturing them, he commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads with the sword. And
Saint Athanasia encouraged her virgin daughters, and she urged them to endure, and she
told them that they were to become brides of Christ, the True Emperor, and martyrs for His
Name’s sake. And Saint ‘Abukir likewise explained [this] to them, and reminded them of
the tribulation which fell upon the apostolic woman Thecla. And the soldiers brought the
virgins to the swordsman, one after the other, and their mother, and they became martyrs;
and afterwards ‘Abukir and John became martyrs. Then the emperor commanded the
soldiers to cast their bodies to the wild beasts of the desert, and to the fowl of the heavens,
but there were certain believers there who took away their bodies secretly, and they
swathed them and laid them in coffers until the days of persecution should be ended. And
at length a church was built for them, and the believers laid their bodies in it, and very
many signs and miracles took place through them.
And on this day also died Mary, the sinner, who anointed our Lord with unguent. This
blessed woman was first of all a sinner, and she acquired all her possessions by fornication,
and she used to decorate herself with divers dresses and ornaments in order to lead young
men astray. One day she put on her ornamental apparel according to her wont, and she
anointed herself, and perfumed her body, and she looked at herself in a mirror and she
admired the ruddiness of her cheeks, and the beauty of her eyes for a very long time, that is
to say, for an hour, as she was seated. And then a good thought came upon her, and she
remembered death, and the fleeting character of the world. And she heard that our Lord
Jesus Christ accepted sinners, and that He would pardon her sins, and she took all her
money, and bought an alabastron of scented unguent. And she went to Him whilst He was
342

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
sitting at meat in the house of Simon, and she prostrated herself at His feet, and she
anointed Him with the unguent, and washed Him with her tears and dried Him with the
hair of her head. And when our Lord saw the greatness of her love, He remitted her sins to
her, and commanded [the disciples] to make mention of her when they preached the
Gospel. And from that time she ministered unto Him with the holy women. Salutation to
Mary.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 07
(February 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Alexander, the forty-third Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This saint was a monk in Debra Bataron, which is, being interpreted,
“Monastery of the Fathers,” and, by the Will of God, he was appointed Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. He was righteous, and pure, and was a learned man, but great
tribulation came during the days of his office. For the King of Egypt, who was reigning at
that time, appointed his son to rule over the kingdom, and he plundered the monasteries of
the monks of the desert of Scete. Here is an example of his excessive infidelity and
wickedness: He went into a monastery to the south of Mesr (Cairo), and saw a picture of
our Lady Mary; now it was decorated, and upon it was a dress of beautiful silk. And he
said, “What is this?” And the priest said unto him, “This is a picture of our Lady Mary, the
mother of Christ.” And the king’s son abused it, and spat in its face, and said, “If I live I
will destroy the Christians and blot them out”; and forthwith he reviled our Lord Christ.
When the night came he saw a most terrifying and horrible vision, and in the morning he
told his father, saying, “Last night great tribulation and intense pain came upon me from
the Satans, and I saw a man sitting upon a great throne, and he was exceedingly horrible,
and frightful, and terrifying, and his face shone brighter than the sun, and thousands of
thousands [of angels] were going round about him carrying weapons of war, and I and thou
were bound behind him. And I asked them [saying], ‘What is this?’ And they said unto
me, ‘This is Christ, the King of the Christians, Whom thou didst mock yesterday.’ And
then one of those who were carrying weapons of war came to me, and pierced my side with
his spear, and none took the spear out, and at length I died.” When his father heard this he
was exceedingly sorry, and straightway the young man fell ill, and his tongue became
dumb, and he died that night; and after forty days his father died also, and another king
was appointed in his stead. And he afflicted the Christians greatly, and he seized Abba
Alexander and tortured him until he asked the people for three thousand dinars of gold, and
gave them to him. And God blotted out that king quickly, and after him was appointed
another king, who was worse then he. And he seized the captain of the troops of this
father, and demanded from him three thousand dinars of gold as before. And this father
said unto him, “Some I must beg for from the believers, and some I must borrow”; but he
would not accept these words from him. And the saint said unto the king, “Wait until I can
ask some other people”; and he waited for him. And this father went up into Upper Egypt
to beg. And there was a certain desert monk, who was in charge of a monastery, and he
had with him two disciples, and the desert man commanded his disciples to clear out a
343

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
place in the monastery, and they found there five water jars filled with gold; and the
disciples stole one jar and hid it, and they brought to the desert monk, their teacher, four
water pots filled with gold, and the desert monk sent them to the archbishop to help him.
And when the two disciples of the desert monk [had carried] them to the archbishop, they
took the water-pot of gold which they had stolen, and went into the world, and they cast
aside their monks’ garb, and they acquired with that gold menservants and maidservants,
and cattle. And the governor of that city commanded the soldiers to beat them, and the two
disciples confessed that they had found five water-pots full of gold; and the governor sent
the captain of his soldiers to the king and he reported this matter to him. And the king sent
the captain of his troops, and he plundered the house of the archbishop, and carried off all
the sacred vessels and furniture of the churches. And then he had this father brought, and
he bound him with fetters and put him in prison, and treated him with contumely, and said
unto him, “Bring me the four water-pots which were full of gold [and contained] thirty
hundred dinars.” And the archbishop said unto him, “I have no possessions whatsoever of
this fleeting world,” but the king would not release him from prison until the archbishop
had sent to all the people, and they had brought to him thirty hundred gold dinars and
given them to him. And then God blotted out this wicked king, and another king worse
then he was appointed in his place, and he compelled all the Christian people to brand on
their hands, instead of the honorable Cross, the name of the unclean and lying prophet,
[Muhammad,] that is the mark of the beast, concerning which John the Evangelist and
Theologian prophesied (Revelation xvi, 2). And that wicked king sent to all the cities, and
commanded the people to do this, and he commanded the archbishop to do this. And the
archbishop entreated him with many petitions to have mercy upon him, but he refused; and
the archbishop asked him to wait for three days. And the archbishop prayed to God
fervently, and with many entreaties, not to cast him away from Him, and not to let him
come into this unclean affair; and God heard his prayer, and visited him with a slight
illness. And the archbishop asked the king to allow him to go to his house in the city of
Alexandria, but he refused him, and he thought that he was making an excuse to avoid the
branding of the hand. And after three days the angel of God appeared unto the archbishop,
and said unto him, “On the second day (i.e. to-morrow) thou shalt die.” And the
archbishop said unto his disciples, “Prepare a ship for me, for tomorrow God will visit
me”; and he died in peace. And they carried his body in a ship, and buried it with the
bodies of the fathers, archbishops. In the days of this father the Melchites of the country of
Egypt had a holy archbishop whose name was Anastasius, and his people rose up against
him, and acted hostilely towards him, because of his love for the believing Jacobites. And
he meditated on the matter and betook himself to safety, and he would not associate with
his own people in their enmity against the Jacobite believers. And he forsook his people
and came to this father Alexander, and he submitted to his authority. And this father
honored him greatly, and asked him to occupy an episcopal throne, and rule over the
believers of his flock, and to let him dwell in a monastery like a monk. And Abba
Anastasius was not pleased with these words, and he said unto him, “If I had wanted the
archiepiscopate, behold I am already archbishop, but I want to become thy disciple.” And
after many entreaties, and much argument, which took place between them, Anastasius
was pleased to become a bishop; and this father made him bishop over a certain district in
Egypt, and he shepherded well the flock over which he was placed. And as for Abba
Alexander he sat upon the throne of Mark the Evangelist for four and twenty years and a
half, and he pleased God and died in peace. Salutation to Abba Alexander.
344

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died the holy father, Abba Theodore, the forty-fifth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This saint was a monk in the monastery of the city of Mareotis, now
the name of the city (monastery?) was Tanbura, and he was the disciple of a certain
righteous and perfect elder, who saw by the Holy Spirit that his disciple Theodore would
be appointed Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and he told the people this. And this
father was strictly devoted to God, and he fought a great spiritual fight. He was a man of
goodly appearance, and he wore sackcloth made of hair next to his skin, and over that
garments made of iron; and he was perfect in his humility, and in his meekness. By the
Will of God, Who chose him, he was made Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and he
protected the flock of Christ with a good protection, and he taught them continually, and
read to them the Scriptures daily, and especially on Sundays and on the festivals. And in
all his days there was tranquility and peace, and the Church flourished, and there was no
contention. This father sat on the throne of Saint Mark the Evangelist for fourteen years
and a half, and he fulfilled the duties of his office, and died in peace. Salutation to Abba
Theodore.
Salutation to the desert monk who during a period of seventy years never saw the face of a
man, and who comforted Abba Ebeloy.
And on this day also took place the deaths of Abraken, and Abadir, and Abarianus, and
Nebdalms (Nebeldamas).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 08
(February 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the coming of our Lord Christ into the sanctuary (i.e. temple).
Forty days after His glorious birth Joseph, the just man, who was the messenger of this
mystery, and Saint Mary, His mother, brought Him, that they might fulfill the Law with
which He, to Whom be glory! had commanded the people of Israel, and to offer up
offerings as the Law ordered. And this Simeon, the priest, was a righteous man, and he
carried Him upon his shoulders and held Him up in his hands. And when King Ptolemy,
who was called the “Conqueror,” was reigning in the five thousand nine hundred and
fourth year (?) of our father Adam, and the Jewish people were under his dominion, by the
Will of God he sent to the city of Jerusalem, and brought [to Alexandria] seventy-[two]
learned Jewish Rabbis, and he commanded them to translate the Books of the Law from
the Hebrew tongue into the Greek tongue. And this look place by the Will of God so that
the Law might depart from the Jews, and come to the Christian people who were to appear
after many years. And then the king commanded his officers to separate them into pairs
and to put each pair in a separate place; now they were seventy-two [in number], and he
lodged them in thirty-six tents. And he set men over them to watch them, and to see that
they did not met each other, or make an agreement about what they were going to write, or
change one word of the Law, for it is very well known that the Jews are wicked men. And
when this Simeon, the just man, had translated all the Books of the Law, he came to the
345

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Book of Isaiah the prophet, who saith, “Behold a virgin shall conceive, and shall bear a
son, and His name shall be called Emmanuel” (Isaiah vii, 14). And he was afraid to write
“a virgin shall conceive,” and said, “The king will laugh at him (i.e. the prophet), and will
not accept his word.” And he determined to change the word of the Law as it was written,
and instead of writing the word “virgin” he wrote “young girl.” And then he had doubts
within himself, and he said, “This is impossible--for a virgin to conceive and to bring forth
a son”; and whilst he was thinking upon the matter slumber overcame him and he fell
asleep. And the angel of God appeared unto him, and said unto him, “O thou who doubtest
this thing, thou shalt not taste death until thou hast seen the Christ, Who shall be born of a
virgin, and hast carried Him into the sanctuary, as it might be this day. And the eyes of
Simeon were blind, and when he received our Lord Christ into his hands, his eyes were
opened, and he saw straightway. And the Holy Spirit spoke unto him, saying, “This is He
for Whom thou wast waiting.” And Simeon blessed God, and said, “O Lord dismiss Thy
servant in peace, for I have remained bound in the life of this fleeting world for Thy sake.
Behold, I have come and have seen Thee; dismiss me that I may depart into everlasting
life. Mine eyes have seen Thy salvation which Thou hast prepared before all Thy people.
Thou hast revealed the light to the Gentiles, and glory to Thy people Israel” (Luke ii, 29).
And then he said unto His mother Mary, “This thy Son is set for the falling and the rising
of many of the children of Israel,” that is to say, “For the falling of those who do not
believe in Him, and for the rising of those who do believe in Him.” And then he made
known unto her that suffering and separation would enter her heart at the time of His
Passion, and he said, “The spear of separation which shall be in thy heart shall pass
through it.” And when he had finished what the Law had commanded him, he died in
peace. And Hannah the prophetess, the daughter of Penuel, whom the Holy Gospel
mentioneth, also prophesied concerning Him, and she praised God, and told the orthodox
among the children of Israel that He was the Savior Who should deliver them from the
works of Satan, and from the fetters of Sheol. Salutation to Thy coming to Jerusalem and
Thy reception by Simeon, and to Hannah. Salutation to Simeon who embraced our Lord
and kissed His hand.
And on this day also died Hannah the prophetess, the daughter of Penuel. This woman
was of the tribe of Asher, and her days [for bearing] were passed, and she had lived with
her husband for seven years, and had been a virgin for four and eighty winters; and she
never left the temple, and she fasted and prayed all day and all night. And when they
brought the Lord Jesus into the sanctuary forty days after He was born, she stood up before
Him, and gave thanks to God, and she spoke about Him to all those who waited for the
salvation of Jerusalem; and then she died at a good old age. Salutation to Hannah.
And on this day also died the lady ‘Ammata Krestos, and her two handmaidens. This holy
woman was of the people of the city of Constantinople, and she had a husband, who was in
the Imperial Government, and he died in the days of his early manhood, and left her a
widow, when her days were twelve years. And after a few days a certain man, who was
one of the emperor’s nobles, wanted to take her by force, and she made an excuse to him,
saying, “I am sick with a severe sickness, wait for me until I recover.” And then she
distributed all her money among the poor and needy, and set free her slaves, and taking
two of her handmaidens with her, she went forth by night, without knowing [whither to
go]. And she went into a rock, which was under a high hill, and dwelt there for twelve
years, and each day the birds brought regularly to her various kinds of fruits. And in the
days of the Emperor Constantine one of the historians saith, “I went towards the East in
346

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
order that I might bring a certain piece of work to an end, and I arrived at a monastery, and
the abbot and the monks received me, and I saluted them, and we sat down. And there
were there all kinds of trees full of fruit, and I saw birds carrying off branches with their
fruit on them, and they flew away with them quickly, and did not eat thereof; and having
seen this I marveled, and I said unto the monks, ‘What is this thing?’ And they said unto
me, ‘They have been doing this for eleven years, and we know not what becometh [of the
fruit].’ And I said unto them, ‘It seemeth to me that the birds carry this fruit to the monks
who are in the mountains.’ And as I was saying this a raven came, and taking a branch
covered with fruit flew away. And I followed it, together with the abbot and the monks, so
that we might know what the raven did with the fruit, and when the bird alighted in a
ravine it dropped the branch and returned. And when we came to this place we threw a
stone, and we heard a voice, saying, ‘If ye be Christians do not kill us.’ And we said unto
them, ‘Who are ye?’ And they said unto us, ‘If ye wish to see our faces throw us down
three garments, for we are naked.’ And we threw down garments to them, and we went
down to them by means of a very narrow mountain path, and when we came there three
women received us, and they bowed to us, and we bowed to them. And one of them sat
down, and the other stood up before her. And the abbot said unto her, ‘Whence art thou, O
my mother, my lady, and how dost thou come to be here?’ And she told him all her story,
from the beginning even unto the end thereof. And the abbot said unto her, ‘If thou
wishest we will fetch food from the monastery, and we will partake of it with thee.’ And
she said unto him, ‘O my father, command [thy servants] to bring hither a priest with the
Offering, so that we may partake of the Holy Mysteries of Christ the Vivifier; but since
thou wilt have gone forth thou wilt not partake of the Offering with us.’ And the abbot
commanded his servants to bring a priest with the Offering, and she and her handmaidens
partook of the Holy Mysteries. And on the following day she prayed and delivered up her
soul into the hand of God, and her handmaidens died with her, one after the other. And the
monks wrapped them in cloths and buried them with psalms and hymns.” Salutation to the
three women who bore the hardships of the desert naked.
And on this day also died Abba Elias of the desert of Scete, the great elder whose works were most
excellent. When the righteous Emperor Theodosius sent to the desert of Scete a letter asking the
monks to send to him an elder monk of excellent works so that he might comfort him with his
words, they sent this holy man, and they wrote a letter by the hand of another monk, saying,
“Behold we have sent unto thee a holy man who is called ‘Elias,’ the counterpart of Elias, the
prophet,” And when Elias arrived, the Emperor Theodosius said unto the elder, “The monks have
sent to me a letter saying that thy spiritual strife resembleth that of Elias the prophet.” And the
elder said unto him with humility and meekness, “O righteous Emperor, forgive me. Every man is
known by his ability (or, natural disposition). And as for the strife of Elias, because of his
righteousness a raven used to bring him his food, whereas so far as I am concerned, I have all the
food which I require. If I laid my bread out in the sun, a raven would come and carry it off.”
When the emperor heard this he marveled at the savor of his words, and he said unto him, “Tell
me, O my father, why God did not give unto thee a son?” And the elder said, “Because the days
will come when there shall arise on the earth division in respect of the Faith. For this reason, God
hath not given unto me a son, so that he might never mingle with those who doubt (or the
‘dividers’).” And the emperor wished to give him money, but he would not take it, and he turned
back to his abode, and it is said of him, that he did not eat food until he returned to his cell; and he
died in peace. Salutation to Elias [of Scete].

Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

347

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
YEKATIT 09
(February 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, the great one, Abba Barsoma, the Syrian, the father of the
monks of the country of Syria. The parents of this saint were of the people of the city of
Samisot. And a certain dweller in a cell prophesied concerning him, and said unto his
father before his birth, “Assuredly there shall go forth from thee a fruit of flavor and
excellence, and the memorial of him shall be heard in all the country of Syria”; and he
made him to know what would happen to him. And having been born Barsoma grew up in
the knowledge of God, and he fled from his parents, and came to the River Euphrates; and
there lived there a certain righteous man, whose name was Abraham, and he took him into
the monastery through fear of his father. And Saint Abba Barsoma dwelt in a rock, and he
fought a great fight there, and his fame was noised abroad everywhere, and he had many
disciples. Now the water of the place where he lived was exceedingly bitter, and when he
had prayed [over it] God changed it, and it became sweet. And God performed great signs
and wonders by his hands, and among them are the following: Once he and his disciples
were a long way from their cells, and when the time of sunset drew nigh they were still far
away from their cells. And he asked our Lord Jesus Christ, and He made the sun to stand
still until the saint arrived in his cell. And again there was a city, the name of which was
Ra’am, whereof the people were infidels, and by the Will of God the rain was withheld,
and no rain fell on them. And being in tribulation they came to Saint Barsoma, and he
admonished them, and he made an agreement with them that if they would believe in God,
he would make an abundant rain to fall upon them; and they said unto him, “Yea, we
will.” And he asked our Lord Christ, and He rained on them, and they believed on God.
And there was also another city, the people whereof were infidels, and he converted them
all to the knowledge of God, and he destroyed many houses of idols. And this saint made
for himself an abode, wherein he stood upright and never sat down for four and fifty years,
and when he was tired of keeping vigil and toil he slumbered standing up, with a brass
vessel under his hand on which to lean; and he fasted seven days at a time. And this saint
lived in the days of Abba Simeon of the Pillar, and he wished to see him greatly, for he had
heard the report of his holiness and virtues from many men. And this holy man came to
Abba Simeon, and each was blessed by the other, and then he returned to his monastery.
And he preached in the city of Samaria, and when he wrought before the people many
signs and wonders, they believed. And he went to the Emperor Theodosius, and
strengthened him in the True Faith, and the emperor gave him much money, but he would
accept nothing whatsoever from him. And the emperor wrote an order that the saint was to
have dominion over all the bishops in the country of Antioch, and he gave him the ring
from his fingers. And when the General Council of Two Hundred Bishops assembled in
the city of Ephesus, on account of Nestorius, the “denier,” and they anathematized him,
and cursed him, and cut him off [from his office], this father was with them. And the
emperor wrote to him with his own hand, commanding that all the officials who were
appointed in the country of Antioch were to be in submission to him; and Barsoma wrote
letters to all the cities, and sealed them with the imperial seal, and commanded them to do
good works, and to hate evil men. And certain men calumniated him to the emperor, and
said unto him, “Behold, Abba Barsoma eateth well, and drinketh well, and weareth fine
apparel”; and the emperor sent one of his messengers to find out if what was reported of
348

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Abba Barsoma was true. And when the emperor’s friend came to the saint, he did not find
that even the smallest particular of the evil things which they had spoken about him was
true. And then he brought him before the emperor, who did not find that he had changed
any of his spiritual qualities, of which he had knowledge, and the emperor paid him great
honor, and he returned to his monastery. And when the Emperor Marcianus, the infidel,
assembled the Council of Chalcedon, the councilors of the emperor asked him to allow
them to bring Barsoma to them, now they did not know that the grace of the Holy Spirit
was upon him, and that he might neither dispute with them, nor overcome them in
argument, nor put them to shame. And when the unclean General Council, wherein they
separated Christ, and assigned to Him Two Natures, was ended, the blessed Barsoma
argued against them, and made their words of no effect, and he anathematized them and
excommunicated them. And they wrote to the emperor and calumniated Barsoma, and he
made him come, but he was not able to resist the grace of the Holy Spirit which was upon
him. And then Abba Barsoma cursed the empress, and she departed; but she only
remained alive for a few days, and she died an evil death. And the heretics opposed him,
and they wrote to all the cities, urging the people not to submit to him; but they did not
listen to them, and did not abandon the command and doctrine (or, teaching) of the saint.
And three hundred heretics banded themselves together, having with them the heretical
bishops, and they lay in wait on the road to kill him; and then they sent a message to him
telling him to come to them, so that they might go to the church together. And when he
had come, and was journeying along the road with them, they cast stones at him, and their
stones flew back on their own heads; and they fled and departed from him, being
ashamed. And then God, wishing to take him out of the bondage of this world, sent unto
him an angel who said, “After two days thou shalt depart from this world.” And Saint
Abba Barsoma sent his disciple to the cities which were round about him, and he
comforted the believers; and as the disciple was going about he came to a place wherein
was the head of Saint John the Baptist, and he saluted his holy head. And he wept, and he
asked it about the Emperor Marcianus, and a voice came forth from the head of Saint John
the Baptist, saying, “Fear not, for he is dead; Barsoma complained of him to God.” And
Saint Abba Barsoma blessed his disciple, and he died in peace. And a pillar of light
appeared by the gates of his cell, and [it reached] to heaven, and all the believers saw it
from afar off, and they came to the saint, and they found that he was dead. And they were
blessed by him, and they wept over him, and sorrowed because of their separation from
their spiritual father. And they prepared him for burial in a manner befitting him, and with
the singing of many psalms and hymns they laid him in the grave. Salutation to Barsoma,
the “son of fasting.”
And on this day also Saint Paul the Syrian became a martyr. The parents of this holy man
were Syrians, and they were merchants, and lived in the city of Alexandria, wherein they
begot this saint; and then they lived in the city of ‘Esmunain. When he was grown up, his
parents died and left him much money. When he heard that the heretic emperors tortured
the believing saints who believed on the Name of Christ, and killed them, he gave all his
money to the poor and needy, and then he prayed, and asked our Lord Christ to direct him
in the path which would please Him. And God sent to him Suriel, His angel, and he told
him about all the torture which should come upon him for the sake of the Name of Christ.
And he said unto him, “Behold, God hath commanded me to be with thee, and to
strengthen thee; fear not.” And he rose up and went to the city of Antinoe, and confessed
our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor, who commanded the soldiers to strip him naked
and to beat him with whips, and they did so; then they thrust burning torches into his sides,
349

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
but the fire did not touch him. And the king offered to him much money, so that he might
deny Christ. And the blessed Paul said unto him, “When my parents died they left me
sixteen (or, seventeen) maklit of gold, but I reject them and would not take them, because
of [my] love for Christ; how then can I accept thy money?” And the governor commanded
them to make iron rods red-hot, and to thrust them into his ears, and mouth, and they did
so; and God sent His angel Suriel to him, and he touched his body, and healed him. And
they put upon his body venomous serpents, but they would not touch him. And the
governor commanded them to cut out his tongue, and they cut it out, and God healed him.
And when the governor went to the city of Alexandria, he took Paul with him; and our
Lord Christ appeared to him in the ship and comforted him, and strengthened him. And
the saint had a friend whose name was Abba ‘Esi, and Takla his sister, and our Lord Christ
told him that his body should be laid with their bodies, and his soul with their souls; now
these saints were in prison in the city of Alexandria. And when Saint Paul had come unto
them, they embraced each other, and their souls rejoiced at seeing him. And when the
governor returned to the city of Antinoe, they cut off the head of Saint Paul and threw it on
the riverbank, and he received the crown of martyrdom. And certain believing men took
his body, and wrapped it up in costly cloths, and hid it in their houses; and many signs and
wonders and many healings took place through it. Salutation to Paul. Salutation to the
translation of thy body.
And on this day is celebrated the commemoration of Peter the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 10
(February 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy and blessed disciple, that is to say apostle, James, the son of
Alphaeus, became a martyr. This blessed apostle after having preached the preaching of
the blessed Gospel in all the cities, returned to Jerusalem, and went into the synagogue of
the Jews. And he preached openly the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and revealed to them
that He was the Son of God in truth; and that before the world was He was with the Father;
and that He is His Word, for He saith, “In our own image and likeness”; and that He
dwelleth in heaven, above the Cherubim and Seraphim, who praise [God]; and that it is He
Who existeth at His great right hand in heaven, and that it was He Who was carried in the
womb of Mary the Virgin, and that He was God, Who became man. This was the word of
the apostle among those crowds, and he was unafraid. One man became a witness of the
birth of the Son of God, Who was One in His Death, and in His Resurrection, and in His
Ascension into heaven. And thus he taught all the multitudes the Faith of Christ. And
when the multitude heard the word of the apostle, they became very angry with the anger,
which was of their father Satan, who was with them, and they were wroth with the apostle
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And they all banded together against him, and the Jews seized
him, and put his blood on their own heads, and they took him and brought him to the
Emperor Gelawdios, the deputy of the Emperor of Rome. And they calumniated this
disciple to him, and they told him, saying, “This man hath preached to us of another king
350

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
besides Caesar.” And when the emperor heard this he commanded the soldiers to stone the
Apostle James, and they all made haste and stoned him and he died in peace, and received
the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And certain believing men took
his body, and prepared it for burial, and they buried it by the sanctuary. Salutation to
James the Apostle and martyr of Christ.
And on this day also Saint Justus became a martyr. This saint was the son of Nomarius
(Numerianus), the Emperor of Rome. And having gone to the war, and having married the
sister of Diocletian, the infidel, his wife made him king; and when Justus returned from the
war, and found that Diocletian had denied Christ, he sorrowed with a very great sorrow
because of it. And when the men of the city saw this, they all gathered together to him,
and they said unto him, “We will kill Diocletian and thou shalt sit upon the throne of the
kingdom.” But he did not wish this, and he persuaded them not to kill Diocletian for he
had chosen a heavenly rather than an earthly kingdom. And he drew nigh to the emperor,
and confessed our Lord Christ before him; and the emperor said unto him, “My lord Justus,
who hath forced thee to do this against thy wish?” Now the emperor was very much afraid
of Justus. And Saint Justus said unto him, “As my Lord Jesus Christ liveth if thou dost not
write the decree for my fight, so that I may finish my martyrdom, I will make the people of
this city to rise up against thee, and expel thee from thy kingdom.” And Diocletian was
afraid of him, and commanded the soldiers to take him to the country of Egypt, together
with Theocleia his wife, and Aboli his son. And thus he sent them to the country of
Egypt. And he commanded the governor of the city of Alexandria to persuade him quietly,
and not to cause him vexation of heart, for, he said, peradventure his heart will turn, and he
will be submissive to the emperor; and if his heart doth not turn, separate him not from his
wife and his son. And when Justus arrived in the land of Egypt (now he had with him
some of his servants, and the emperor’s letter), as soon as the governor of the city of
Alexandria saw him, he was greatly afraid of him. And he began to persuade him, and he
said unto him, “My lord, do not this thing, and do not disgrace thine honorable position”;
and Saint Justus said unto him, “Do not multiply words.” And the governor was afraid,
and sent him to Upper Egypt, to the city of Antinoe, and his son ‘Aboli to the city of Basta,
and Theocleia his wife to the city of Sa, and he gave to each of them one of their servants
to remain with them until they finished their martyrdoms, and to care for their bodies. And
Saint Justus finished his fight nobly, and they cut off his head with the sword in the city of
Antinoe, and he received an incorruptible and everlasting crown in the kingdom of the
heavens. And many signs and miracles, and many healings, took place through his body.
Salutation to Justus.
And on this day also died the holy father, the man devoted to God, the learned one, the
fighter, the teacher of all the ends of the world, Abba Isidore from the city of Farma. The
parents of this saint were rich and noble people and they belonged to the honorable folk of
Mesr (Cairo), and were kinsfolk of our holy fathers and archbishops Abba Theophilus and
Abba Cyril of the city of Alexandria. And this saint was the only child of his parents, and
they taught him spiritual and material doctrine, and they taught him all the Books of the
Church, and he kept them with him and learned them by heart. And he also learned the
philosophy of the Greeks, and the knowledge of the stars of the heavens; and of what goeth
round all the ends of the world, and he excelled many in his knowledge and in philosophy;
and he was devoted to God, and was a fighter, and vigilant, and lowly. And when he heard
that the men of the cities had agreed together, and had taken counsel with the bishops to
take him and to make him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, he fled by night and came
351

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to the city of Farma, and became a monk there. Thence he departed to a small cell, and
lived there alone for many years. And he composed many Homilies and Admonitions,
some of which are addressed to kings and governors; and he translated many books, [and]
Books of the Church, and the Old and the New Testaments. Now the number of the
Books, and the Homilies, and the Admonitions, and the Questions which other people
asked him, and the Epistles which he composed, and dispatched to the bishops and
archbishops of many dioceses is known; and the number is ten thousand, and the Epistles
and Homilies and Admonitions are eighty hundred. Now the Holy Spirit used to well up in
his heart, and flow forth even as do the rivers. And having finished this good work, and
followed a good course of life with great spiritual fighting, he arrived at a good old age;
and he pleased God and died in peace. Salutation to Isidore.
And on this day also Saint Felos, Bishop of the country of Fars (Persia), became a martyr.
When the bishop would not sacrifice to the fire, and would not worship the sun, the King
of Persia tortured him; and when he was tired of torturing him he cut off his head with a
sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation
to Felos, the bishop, whom the King of Persia killed with a hatchet.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of Nicolaus, and Simon, and
Sadalakos.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 11
(February 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And on this day the holy and honorable Abba Belanteyanos, Archbishop of the city of
Rome, became a martyr. This honored and learned and wise saint and fighter was
appointed Archbishop of the city of Rome, and he sat upon the throne of Peter, the chief of
the Apostles, for twelve years in quietness and peace; and he taught the people the beauty
of piety, and he preached to them the Faith of righteousness. And Claudius, the emperor
and governor, having risen up against the Emperor Philip, and killed him, and began to
reign in his stead. This infidel stirred up great trials and many tribulations for the believers,
and he martyred very many people. And the Seven Children, who are known to have slept
in a cave for many years, fled from him. He built in the city of Ephesus a great temple
wherein he established idols, and he killed all those who would not worship them. And
when he heard that this saint was opposed to them, and that he taught the believers to obey
him he sent to the city of Rome, and had him brought to Ephesus, and asked him to
worship idols; and the saint would not obey him, but laughed at him and his idols, and
cursed them. And the governor was angry with him, and tortured him severely, for the
space of one year, and when he was tired of torturing him he cut off his head with a sword,
and the saint received a crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to
Belanteyanos.
And on this day also died Abba Eulog (Eulogius), the writer and companion of lions. The
parents of this saint were from the city of Gasbin (Nisibis), and they were rich in gold and
352

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
in silver, and they taught their son all the Ordinances of the Church; after a few [days] they
died, and left him much money. One day Abba ‘Eulog (Eulogius) remembered the word of
the Gospel which saith, “Sell all thy goods and give [the price thereof] to the poor and
needy, and take up My Cross, and come, follow Me” (Matthew xvi, 24). And straightway
he gave away all his goods to the poor, and departed to the monastery of Awgin; and when
‘Awgin saw him, he received him with joy, for before ‘Eulog (Eulogius) came to him he
saw a vision in which one said unto him, “Behold a young man of goodly appearance will
come unto thee, receive him, and let him mix with the brethren who minister unto thee”;
and ‘Awgin continued to counsel him for the space of three years. When he saw his
holiness, and his perfection, he arrayed him in the garb of the monk, which is the dress of
the angels. And ‘Eulog (Eulogius) toiled hard in the ascetic life, and he fasted from one
Sabbath to the next, and his food was bread and salt. And he used to pray six (or, seven)
hundred prayers by day and night, and did not sleep, and he continued to fight this fight for
thirty years, and then he entreated his teacher [to be allowed to go into the desert]. And he
departed to the desert, and went into a little cell, wherein he fought the fight for fifty years;
and God gave him two lions, which ministered unto all his wants. And then he became
sick with a grievous sickness, and he said unto the lions, “I want to drink some hot water.”
And the lions went into the mountain, and they found a shepherd who was watching his
flocks, and [one of the lions] took this shepherd up and brought him to the door of the cell
of the holy man. And when the shepherd saw him, he bowed low before him, and said
unto him, “What dost thou want, O my father?” And ‘Eulog (Eulogius) said unto him,
“Give me some hot water to drink”; and the shepherd supplied his want, and then Abba
‘Eulog (Eulogius) commanded the lion to take the shepherd back to his dwelling. And
when the shepherd arrived he told all the people about it, saying, “I found a righteous man,
for the sole of whose foot the world is not [large enough?].’ And when they heard the
report of him, all the people gathered together to him, and they brought to him all those
who were sick, and he healed them. And in those days his teacher Abba ‘Awgin wished to
go to the country of Fars (Persia), and to convert those who worshipped idols to the True
Faith, and he wished to take with him his son Abba ‘Eulog (Eulogius), but before he sent
him a message to this effect, the Holy Spirit made the lion to understand, and the lion
carried the cloak and the Gospel of the holy man, and made him signs concerning the road,
and the saint followed him, and arrived at the place where Mar ‘Awgin was; and when
‘Awgin saw him, he received him with gladness. And as they were traveling along the
road they came to the River Tigris, and the waters thereof were divided for them, and they
passed over. And when they arrived in the city, they converted the worshippers of idols to
the True Faith, and baptized them in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost. One day when the holy men were hungry Mar ‘Eulog (Eulogius) commanded the
lions to seek some food for them, and when the lions had set out they found al old man
carrying a load of bread on a donkey, on which was a child; and the lions took this donkey
and brought him to the holy men. Now the child died of fright, but when Abba ‘Eulog
(Eulogius) had prayed, he restored him to life. And then he returned to his cell, and fell
sick a little, and he died and was buried with great honor. And the lions continued to
watch by his grave for twelve years, and then they returned to the desert. Salutation to
‘Eulog (Eulogius), the companion of lions.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of Abraham the bishop, and Kanti,
and Abba Makabis (Maccabaeus) the monk.

353

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died Abba Patra (Batra), the disciple of Abba Sylvanus. This saint
used to live in a cell of Dabra Sina keeping the precepts of the doctrine, and at the time of
supper he used to give to his body what it needed. And when they made him Bishop of
Farnu he exhausted himself greatly by excessive abstinence, and his disciples said unto
him, “O our father, if thou wast in the desert thou couldst not use such excessive
abstinence.” And he said unto them, “When I was in the desert, in poverty, [and living
upon] fragments, I ordered myself so that my body was never sick; but now that I am in a
community I have many wants, and it is best for me to reduce my body and keep it in
subjection.” And he continued to fight the fight strenuously, and then he died. Salutation
to Abba Patra.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 12
(February 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the glorious angel, Michael the Archangel, for on this day
God sent him to Samson the giant, and helped him until he conquered the Philistines.
They wanted to kill him, and God gave him power over them, and he blotted them out and
in one day killed of them ten hundred with the jawbone of an ass. And when he was
thirsty, and nigh to die, Michael the Archangel appeared unto him, and strengthened him,
and God made water to flow out from a Jawbone, and he drank and was saved. And when
a crowd of the Philistines assembled, and devised a scheme against him with his wife, and
blinded his eyes and took him into the house of idols, the angel Michael appeared unto
him, and gave him strength and he killed them all. Salutation to Michael.
And on this day died the holy father Gelasius, the fighter, and devoted man of God. This
saint had believing and God-fearing parents, and they taught him all the Ordinances of the
Church. And he was made a deacon, and he renounced the world from his early years, and
he bore the yoke of Christ, and fought a great and strenuous ascetic fight, with fasting, and
prayer, and prostrations, and vigils. And God chose him, and he was made priest of the
monks of the desert of Scete. And having perfected his spiritual fighting, and his devotion
to God, and his piety, the angel of God appeared unto him as he appeared unto Saint
Pachomius, and commanded him to gather about him young monks, and to teach them the
fear of God, and the way of the ascetic life; and he did as the angel of God commanded
him. And he gathered together monks, and established a spiritual companionship, and he
ruled them with a divine rule. And he was not among them as one of them, but as their
servant, and as one who was less than they. This father rejected the possessions of this
world, and he was exceedingly meek. And he copied a large book wherein he collected all
the Books of the Old and New Testaments, and he spent [on this book] of the money which
he made by his copying, eighteen dinars of gold, and laid that book upon the altar in the
church so that all the monks might read therein whensoever they required healing from it.
And there came a certain wandering monk to visit the elder Abba Gelasius, and when he
saw the book it pleased him, and when he left that place he stole it, and carried it off, and
after he arrived in the city [he tried] to sell it. And a certain man said unto him, “How
354

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
much is its price?” And the thief said unto him, “Give me sixteen dinars in gold”; and he
who wanted to buy it said unto him, “Yea, I will give thee what thou sayest, but wait for
me whilst I shew it to my friend.” And the thief gave him the book, and the man who
wanted to buy it took it to Saint Gelasius to shew it to him, so that if it was good he might
give the price of the book to the owner thereof. And when Saint Abba Gelasius saw the
book, he said unto him that had brought it, “How much is the price which he demandeth
from thee?” And the man said, “He demandeth from me sixteen dinars of gold.” And
Saint Gelasius answered and said unto him, “Buy [it] for it is a good [book], and the price
thereof is little”; and the man took the book, and carried it to his house. And when the
thief came to him demanding the price of the book, the man who wanted to buy it did not
tell him what this father had said to him, but he said, “I showed it to Abba Gelasius, and he
said unto me, ‘Its price is much.’” And the brother who stole the book said unto him, “Did
not the elder say unto thee anything else?” And the man said unto him, “Nothing else.”
And the man who stole the book said unto him, “I do not wish to sell the book,” and he
took it and departed to Saint Gelasius, and he bowed low to him, and repented, and wept
before him, and he asked him, saying, “Forgive me my sin, and take thy book, for Satan
led me astray”; and the saint said unto him, “I do not want to take it.” And that brother
said unto him, “If thou dost not take it I shall never have rest, and sorrow will never be
removed from me”: and he made many prostrations at the feet of the saint, and he besought
him to have mercy upon him, and to take his book from him. And with great labor and toil
the saint took the book from him, and no man knew what became of it. And God gave
unto this father Gelasius the gift of prophecy, and the power to work signs and wonders.
One day certain men brought a fish to the monastery, and the cook boiled it and put it in
his cell, and having set a boy to watch it he went about his business; and the boy ate the
greater part of he fish. And when the cook came back, and found that the boy had eaten
[the greater part] of the fish, he was wroth with him, and he said unto him, “Why did you
eat of the fish before the holy elder had blessed it?” And after this, by the work of Satan,
wrath came upon him, and he kicked him with his foot, and the boy fell down upon the
ground and died. And when he saw that the boy was dead, he was greatly dismayed, and
fear came upon him, and he went and told the elder Gelasius what had happened. And the
saint said unto him, “Take him up, and lay him in the sanctuary”; and the man went and
did as the elder had commanded. And when the holy elder came into the church, they
prayed the evening prayer, and when they had finished the prayer, the elder went forth
from the sanctuary, and the boy was following him, and none of the monks knew what had
happened. And the elder laid a penance on the cook, and commanded him to tell none of
the monks about this until after his death. And Saint Abba Gelasius having finished all his
good work, and his excellent fight, the time for God to comfort him arrived; and he
departed from this fleeting world, and left behind an excellent remembrance; and he
pleased God, and died in peace. Salutation to Gelasius.
And on this day also is commemorated Derkalas (Dereskal).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

355

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
YEKATIT 13
(February 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy and honorable Sergius became a martyr, and with him were his father,
and his mother, and his brethren, and many men from the city of Athribis. This saint had
excellent parents; his father’s name was Theodore, and his mother’s name was Mary. And
when his days were twenty years, he determined in his heart to die for the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and he came to Cyprianus the governor, and confessed our Lord Jesus
Christ before him. And the governor commanded the soldiers to inflict every kind of
torture upon him, and to shut him up in prison. And our Lord Jesus Christ commanded the
angels to carry away his soul into heaven, and he saw the habitations of the saints, and his
soul was comforted, and Christ healed him of his sufferings. And a certain priest whose
name was Abba Masun heard of his fight, and two deacons also, and they rose up and
came to the governor of the city of Athribis, and confessed our Lord Christ. And the
governor commanded the soldiers to beat them, and they did as he commanded them, and
all the people were looking on at them, and they walked round about them, and they were
sorry for the deacons and the priest. And the priest rebuked them, and turned his face to
them, and he taught them, and commanded them, saying thus, “Be strong in the True Faith
of our Lord Christ.” And then he prayed over some water, and sprinkled it upon them.
And the grace of the Holy Spirit descended upon them, and they confessed our Lord
Christ; and the soldiers cut off the heads of all of them with the sword, and they received
the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. The governor commanded the
soldiers to cast the priest into the furnace of the public baths, but God delivered him there
from. And the angel of God appeared unto him, and made him to know that he would be
martyred thrice for the sake of Christ, and then the angel of God brought him out of the
furnace. And the governor sent him to the city of Alexandria, and he finished his fight
there, and received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And
Cyprianus, the governor, had Sergius brought before him, and he tortured him with severe
tortures, and then they brought a wheel of brass, and they crushed him, and his members
became two parts, and all his body was torn asunder; but our Lord Christ raised him up
whole and uninjured. Then they brought unto him an idol for him to worship, and the saint
spurned it with his foot, and it fell down, and was broken in pieces. When Cyprianus saw
this he believed in our Lord [Jesus] Christ. And he said, “The god who could not save
himself, how can he save others?” And Eucheius, the captain of the soldiers, tortured Saint
Sergius very severely, and he told the soldiers to flay him, and to rub him with vinegar and
salt mixed together; but Christ gave power to the saint, and he was strong. And when his
mother and his sister heard [of this] they came to him, and when they saw him they wept
over him, and his sister delivered up her spirit through her excessive grief for him. And
the saint prayed to God, and his sister rose up from the dead, and became alive
straightway. And Saint Julius, of the city of ‘Akpihas, the writer of martyrdoms, came to
him, and he enquired about his body, and would bury it. And then Eucheius commanded
them to torture Saint Sergius on the wheel, and to thrust burning torches into his ears, and
to pluck out the nails of his hands and feet, and to suspend a huge stone from his neck, and
to lay him upon the iron bed and to light a fire beneath him; and they did these things even
as the captain commanded, but our Lord Jesus Christ strengthened him, and healed his
wounds, and raised him up whole and uninjured. And the captain of the soldiers being
356

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
weary of torturing him, he commanded them to cut off his head with the sword; and when
the saint heard this he rejoiced exceedingly. And he sent a message to his father, and his
mother, and his brethren, and all his kinsfolk and the men of his household, and they came
to see him and they found him with a gag in his mouth. And the soldiers were dragging
him away to cut off the head of the saint and the heads of all those who were with him; and
they cut off their heads and the saints received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of
the heavens. Now there was a little child among the people, and God opened his eyes, and
he saw the souls of the holy martyrs, and the angels carrying them up into heaven, and he
cried out with a loud voice, saying, “My Lord Jesus Christ have mercy upon me.” And his
parents were afraid lest the governor should hear him, and destroy them because of him,
and they shut his mouth, as he continued to cry out and to call upon our Lord [Jesus]
Christ, and then they laid stones upon him until he delivered up his soul, and received the
crown of life in the kingdom of the heavens. And the angels took his soul, and carried it
up into heaven. Salutation to Sergius, whose nails were cut out with knives.
And on this day also died Eusebius the martyr, of splendid glory, and sweet perfume, the
son of the judge (or, governor) of Syria; and he had a sister who was full of the spirit, and
whose name was Eulophia. This saint was brought up carefully and wisely, and then they
betrothed him to a beautiful maiden, the daughter of the Emperor of Rome, and they
brought her to his house with great splendor. And on that day he went to his sister, and
said unto her, “Counsel me with counsel. Is it better to take a wife, and to live with her [or
no]? I do not wish to do this, for I long to renounce the world.” And she said unto him,
“What will the taste of this fleeting world benefit thee? It is better for thee to dwell in
virginity like Demetrius the Archbishop.” And when the evening had come he went into
the bridal-chamber where was the bride, whom they had brought unto him, and he took her
head (or, neck) and kissed her, and said unto her, “Prithee, tell me if I may say unto thee a
matter.” And she said unto him, “Speak, tell me.” And he made an agreement with her,
and he said unto her, “O my sister, know thou that the lust of the world passeth away, and
that comeliness and beauty fade, and that nothing whatsoever profiteth a man except the
working of righteousness. And now, it is better for us to live as virgins, and not to defile
the temples of our bodies of flesh.” And she said unto him, “I agree, O my brother, I do
not wish to marry.” And the two of them began to travel together along the path of
righteousness, and they dwelt in purity for two years, and they ate no food until [after] they
had received the Offering, and they slept in the same bed, and each night they stood in the
river, and by day they went into the church, the name whereof is ‘Atra, and each of them
made four thousand prostrations, and they read the Psalms of David and the Gospel of
John continually. One day the wife of the King of Syria saw Eusebius, and she
commanded two of her servants to bring him to her. And when they had brought him,
straightway she laid down carpets and purple linen on her bed, and she adorned herself and
put round her neck a gold collar, and she said unto Eusebius, “Come [and] sit down, and I
will tell thee what is in my heart.” And Eusebius said unto her, “I will not sit down with
the wife of the king; tell me what thou hast to say as I stand up.” And she said unto him,
“My flesh quivereth, and my bones melt through the greatness of my love for thee; come
and sit down with me.” And Eusebius answered and said unto her, “I will not lie with
thee. It is not seemly, and the commandment of God is not thus.” And when she wished
to lay hold upon him, he went forth, and ran away, and came into the church. And
straightway the woman called her servants and said unto them, “As soon as he looked at
me with his eyes pain and suffering seized me; he is a magician”; and she commanded
fourteen of the elders to make him come out of the church, and to bring him to her. And
357

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
when they had brought him to her she commanded them to beat him with two iron rods,
and to bind him hand and foot and to hang him up on a tree; and they hung him up outside
the city, and she sent one of her handmaidens to say unto him, “Consent to do the will of
my mistress, that she may have thee taken down”; but he would not hearken unto the voice
of the harlot. And straightway he began to pray with the tears running down his face like
water in the winter, and he said, “O my Lord God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
Who didst command the deliverance of Jacob, and Who didst deliver our fathers from
every trial, deliver Thou Thy servant Eusebius, O Thou Who didst deliver Daniel from the
mouth of the lion, and Susannah from the hand of the Rabbis, deliver me from the hand of
the tyrant and oppressor, for besides Thee I have no other helper.” And then the queen
commanded them to strangle him with a cord, and to shoot at him four hundred and sixtyeight arrows; and when they had done this to him, God commanded the angels Michael
and Gabriel, and they plucked out the arrows, from his limbs, and he became whole, and
there was no injury on him. And when the king came back from his expedition he asked
the queen, saying, “What is the offense of Eusebius? And what is his crime that thou hast
delivered him over to crucifixion and death?” And his wife the queen said unto him, “I am
ashamed to tell thee, for I am afraid of thee”; and the king said, “Speak, tell me, and do not
be afraid of me.” And she said unto him, “This man is a magician. He came to me when I
was alone, and he asked me [to do] what is unseemly to mention, and when I refused him,
he smote me with pains.” And the king commanded the soldiers to take Eusebius down
from the tree and to bring him to him. And when they had brought him, the king said unto
Eusebius, “Why didst thou meditate evilly the doing of a thing which it is not seemly to do
against my wife?” And Eusebius said unto the king, “O my lord, dost thou imagine that
these words are true? It is unnecessary to talk about it.” And the king questioned the
servants and said unto them, “Is this what I hear true?” And they said unto him, “O my
lord the king, when we entered the royal chamber, we found the queen screaming. And
when we asked her, ‘What hath happened to thee?’ she told us thus.” And when the king
heard this he was filled with anger and fury, like a lion, and he commanded them to cut off
the head of Eusebius with the sword, and to cut off his limbs as they cut up an ox, and to
throw him into a cauldron, and to smother his mouth with pitch, and to boil him over the
fire; [and they did so]. And straightway the archangels Michael and Gabriel came, and
they took his body out of the cauldron, and raised him up alive. And after he had risen
from the sleep of death, the people found him walking about in the city; and they told the
king that he was alive, and he commanded them to bring him to him. And straightway he
put four iron bands round him, one round his neck (or, head), one round his body, one
round his thighs, and one round his knees, and then they bound him hand and foot, and cast
him into the fire. And Michael and Gabriel came and cooled the fire, and Uriel the angel
caught him up, and carried him into heaven, where he remained for two years; and then he
returned to earth and lived [here] for forty years preaching the Faith; and through him eight
thousand and fifty hundred pagans believed. And God made a covenant with him that He
would forgive the sins of every one who called upon the name of the saint, or who
celebrated his commemoration.
And on this day also died Philemon the musician. This Philemon the musician used to sing
and play to Arianus the governor, and amuse him. And one day Arianus called Apollo the
reader and said unto him, “Sacrifice to the gods.” And Apollo went to Philemon, and said
unto him, “I will give thee four dinars if thou wilt sacrifice instead of me.” And Philemon
said unto him, “Give me thy garments, and I will wrap my self up in them, and go in
instead of thee.” And when he went in Arianus knew that he was Philemon, and he said
358

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
unto him, “What hath happened unto thee?” And he said unto him, “I am a Christian and I
believe in Christ.” And Arianus said unto him, “Sacrifice to the gods, so that thou mayest
live”: and Philemon said unto him, “Is not this life death because of the Name of Christ?”
And Arianus said unto him, “I will kill thee quickly, before thou canst receive baptism, and
that for which thou hopest will be lost to thee.” When Philemon heard this, he prayed to
God to grant to him Christian baptism, and straightway a cloud of light came from heaven
and baptized him. And Arianus commanded three soldiers to smite Philemon, so that he
might be ashamed and repent. And Philemon said unto him, “I shall not be ashamed, even
if thou smite me more severely than this, for I see that the angels of God rejoice because of
me.” And Arianus commanded them to hang him up on a framework, and to shoot arrows
at him, but not one of them touched him. And when the soldiers told Arianus that he was
still alive, he commanded them to shoot at him again, and as he was standing [there] one of
the arrows came down into the right eye of Arianus, and blinded it. Then straightway he
commanded them to take him down from the framework, and to cut off his head and the
head of Apollo the reader with the sword, and they finished their martyrdom patiently.
And Arianus took a little of the blood of these saints and put it in his eye, and he recovered
his sight, and straightway he believed on Christ. And he released all the prisoners, and
became a martyr by the hand of Diocletian. [This section is wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also died Saint Abba Timothy, the thirty-second Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. To this father and fighter came tribulation, and great trial, because of the True
Faith. And Abba Severus, Archbishop of the city of Antioch, came to the country of Egypt
in those days, and he went about from city to city, and from monastery to monastery, and
from one religious house to another with Abba Timothy, strengthening the believers. And
in the days of this father there appeared in Egypt certain evil men who had come from
Constantinople, and who were of those who believed in the opinion of Eutyches, the
unclean, who confessed the teaching of error and denied the Passion, and the Resurrection
of Christ our Redeemer, and this father anathematized them, and drove them out of Egypt,
and he anathematized those who believed in their words. And in the days of this father
Anastasius the emperor of the believers died, and Justinianus the infidel, the Chalcedonian,
reigned in his stead; and he made Linarius archbishop in the place of Abba Timothy. And
he wished to convert all the men of the True Faith to the evil faith of the Council of
Chalcedon. And he gathered together a Council in the city of Constantinople, and brought
there Abba Severus, Archbishop of the city of Antioch, and his bishops from the country of
the East, and wanted them to believe in the unclean faith of Chalcedon, but they would not
obey him. And he brought great tribulation upon them, and upon all those of the True
Faith; and this father sat for sixteen (or, seventeen) years and died in peace. Salutation to
Severus the lion.
Salutation to John from whose fingers incense dropped. Salutation to Jacob, the saint of
God, who restored the monasteries. Salutation to Archbishop Timothy the preacher.
Salutation to Victor the sun. Salutation to Eusebius, who after being burnt to death was
raised up by Uriel, and lived upon earth for seven years.
And on this day also became martyrs Theodore, the son of Basilides, and Abba Kaphes
(Kefses), and Abba Hephes (Hepes).
And on this day also the birth of Victor the martyr took place.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
359

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
YEKATIT 14
(February 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Severus, Archbishop of the city of Antioch, and
teacher of the men of the True Faith. The kinsfolk of this saint came from the city of
Rome, and his grandfather was a bishop, whose name was Severus, and he came with the
fathers, the Two Hundred Bishops who gathered together in the city of Ephesus. And he
saw a vision in which, as it were, one said unto him, “The son who shall be born among
thy offspring shall establish the True Faith, and they shall call his name ‘Severus,’ like
thine own.” And when that bishop died, his son begat this saint and called his name
Severus. And he studied all the philosophy, which was outside (i.e. profane learning), and
after this he learned the philosophy of the Law of the Church. And as he was going forth
from his city, [he visited] a certain righteous man who lived shut up in a cell outside the
city. And this man rejoiced in him, and said unto him, “Fair is thy coming (i.e. welcome),
O Abba Severus, thou teacher of those of the True Faith, Archbishop of the city of
Antioch”; and Severus marveled when the man called him by his name, for he had no
knowledge of him whatsoever, [and he knew not how he could tell] what would happen to
him before it came to pass. And then this saint grew up, and performed works of ascetic
excellence, and the fame of him and his good renown were noised abroad, And he became
a monk in the monastery of Saint Romanus, and he fought a great fight, and devoted
himself wholly to the performance of works of righteousness. And the fame of him was
noised abroad, even as the Holy Gospel saith, “’The city which is built upon a hill cannot
be hid” (Matthew v, 14). And when the Archbishop of the city of Antioch died, the
bishops and doctors agreed to make this Abba Severus Archbishop of Antioch; and they
seized him against his will and made him archbishop. During his office the Church
flourished in all the ends of the world, for his words reached the heretics in every city, and
his voice cut through their roots like a sharp two-edged sword. Now he only remained in
his office for a few days, for the emperor died, and there reigned in his stead another
emperor, who was an infidel, and who believed in the Council or Chalcedon, and whose
name was Justinian; now the queen, whose name was Theodora, belonged to the True
Faith. And the emperor was afraid of this saint, for [he refused] to enter the unclean faith
[of Chalcedon], and he would not obey him. And then the emperor was exceedingly wroth
with him, and he imagined that the saint was afraid of him, and would submit to him; but
the saint would not hearken to his command, and he was not afraid of his wrath. And the
emperor wished to kill him secretly, but the righteous Queen Theodora, knowing this,
warned the saint to flee from the face of the emperor, and he went forth secretly. Now God
did not want this saint to die at that time, and He preserved him for the benefit of many.
And he used to go about in the cities and monasteries in the garb of the monk, and
strengthen the believers. And he dwelt in the city of Soka, with a certain rich man, a
Christian, whose name was Dorotheus. And he worked many signs and great wonders, and
he was always teaching the believers and strengthening them in the True Faith. And at
length he died in the city of Soka (sic), and his body was translated afterwards to Dabra
Zegag.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Jacob, the fiftieth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This saint was appointed archbishop in the sixteenth (or, seventeenth) year of
360

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the reign of the King of Egypt, whose name was Al-Muizz in God, which is being
interpreted, “he who is obedient to God,” the brother of the governor, the son of Haron
Rashid (Harun Ar-Rashid). And in the days of this father the monasteries of the desert of
Scete were restored, and the monks returned to them. And in his days there was a certain
man whose name was Macarius, of the city of Neroh, and he came to this father Abba
Jacob, the Archbishop, and besought him to visit his house, and to bless [him] in it, and he
went with him. And the man had a son at that time who had been sick, and had died, and
he took him and brought him to Abba Jacob, the Archbishop, and he asked him, saying,
“Have compassion upon me, O my father, for this is my only son and he is dead; I beseech
thee to pray to God on my behalf.” And Abba Jacob said unto him, “Fear not, according to
thy faith so shall it be unto thee.” And he took the child from him, and embraced him in
his bosom, and he prayed over him, and made the sign of the Cross over him, and prayed
to God on his behalf. And God received his prayer, and the soul of the boy went back unto
him, and he opened his eyes and rose up from the dead. And the saint gave him to his
father and said unto him, “Take thy son. He was not dead, but sleeping”; and when his
father saw this miracle great fear came upon him. And he gave away one-half of his
possessions in charity, and he sent orders and had a church built in the city of Jerusalem, so
that it might be an asylum for those of the True Faith who arrived there. And Dionysius,
Archbishop of the city of Antioch, came to Mesr (Cairo), and visited the father Archbishop
Abba Jacob, and he dwelt with him for a few days and [then] returned to his own country.
And this father sat upon his archiepiscopal throne for ten years and eight months, and four
days, and he died in peace.
And on this day also are commemorated Darius, and Paul, and Akudures, and Sedna.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Cyril, the seventy-fifth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This father was of the men of the Fayyum, and he was appointed a
priest there. Later he departed from that place and came to the monastery of Saint Victor
the martyr, which is outside the city, by the will of the Ethiopians, and dwelt therein for
many years, fighting a great fight there. And the fame of his learning and holiness became
noised abroad, and the people seized him against his will and made him Archbishop of
Alexandria; and he protected his flock with a good protection, and drew up a Canon for the
use of priests when they ministered in the church at the times of prayer and consecrations.
And he remained in his office for seven years, two months, and six and twenty days; and
he died in peace. [According to the Bodleian MS, he was surnamed “the son of
Lakuelakue.”]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

361

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
YEKATIT 15
(February 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the righteous prophet Zachariah, who was one of the Twelve Little
Prophets. This righteous man was of the tribe of Levi and the name of his father was
Berechiah, who begot him in the land of Gilead. And they carried him away captive to the
land of the Chaldeans, and whilst he was there he prophesied with the divine gift of
prophecy, which descended upon him. And God spoke by his tongue many faithful and
profitable words, and he prophesied to Iyosedek, and said unto him, “Thou shalt beget a
son, and he shall be a priest to God in Jerusalem.” And he took Iyasu (Joshua) and built a
sanctuary in Jerusalem, after the Captivity, and was buried therein. And he prophesied to
Salathiel, and blessed him, and he said unto him, “Thou shalt beget a son and shalt call his
name ‘Zerubbabel’”; and he begot Zerubbabel, and it was he who built the sanctuary in
Jerusalem with Iyasu (Joshua) (Zechariah iv, 9). And he prophesied to the unclean one, the
King of Persia, and revealed to him the signs of the conquest (?). And he prophesied
concerning the coming of our Lord into Jerusalem riding upon an ass, and upon the foal of
an ass. And he prophesied concerning the forty pieces of silver, which Judas received for
the betrayal of our Redeemer. And he prophesied concerning the scattering of the Apostles
on the night of the Crucifixion. And he prophesied concerning the darkness, which took
place on the day of the Crucifixion, and concerning the light, which hid itself. And he
prophesied concerning the coming of our Lord in His glory, and concerning the sorrow of
the children of Israel who did not believe in Him saying, “And they shall look upon Him
Whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn Him as [parents] mourn for an only son,
and there shall be much grief in Jerusalem” (Zechariah xii, 10). And when the days of his
prophesying were ended he died in peace and was buried in the graves of the prophets.
Salutation to Zachariah.
Salutation to Babnuda.
And on this day is commemorated the consecration of the Church of the Forty Soldiers of
the city of Sebastia, who were martyred. This is the first church, which was built in their
names. The great Saint Basil consecrated it, and he pronounced a discourse upon them and
many encomiums on that day; and he celebrated a great festival in their honor as it were
this day. Salutation to the consecration of this church.
And on this day also died the holy father, the devoted ascetic and fighter Abba
Paphnutius. This father became a monk in his early years, and he fought a great fight, and
devoted himself strenuously to the path of the ascetic life, especially in respect of fasting,
and prayer, and prostrations, and vigils. When he had finished these good works, God, the
Most High, commanded him to go into the remote parts of the desert, far away from the
monasteries of the monks, and to visit the desert saints, and to write down the story of their
fights for the benefit of those who were to read them, and to make us bow to the
commandment of God. And he went into the interior of the desert, and he traveled about
among [the saints], even as a man walketh about through the city; and he found many
monks there, and he learned from them their histories, and he wrote down the histories of
their fights; among these monks were Timothy, the desert monk, and ‘Abunafer. At the
beginning of his journey into the Inner Desert great tribulation fell upon this Saint
362

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Paphnutius through hunger, but the angel of God appeared unto him and strengthened him;
now he was seventeen days without food. And after this he hungered, and dew nigh unto
death, and the angel of God appeared unto him again and rubbed his body and his mouth,
and he again remained for seventeen days without food. And this saint related very many
wonderful things about the desert fathers, and how that some of them had lived for sixty
years, and more, in the desert, without ever seeing a man during the whole period of these
days. And he described also the tribulation of the desert monks when they first arrived
there, and the sufferings which they had endured on their first entrance into the desert, and
how their natural passions contended with them, and how unclean spirits made war on
them, and how afterwards they subdued them, and how the spirits submitted to them, and
worshipped at their feet. And likewise the wild beasts and the lions used to minister to
their wants, and he described how they submitted to them, like a slave to his master. And
he related concerning them that they used to receive the Holy Mysteries on the day
preceding the Sabbath, and on the First Day of the week, and how the angel of God used to
bring to them the Holy Body and Honorable Blood, and give them of the fruits of the
Garden. And it is evident that this father saw and heard marvelous things; and after this he
died in peace.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 16
(February 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and righteous woman Saint Elisabeth, the mother of John the
Baptist. This holy woman was from the city of Jerusalem, and the name of her mother was
Sophia, and name of her father was Matat, the son of Levi, and son of Melki, of the tribe of
Aaron, of the tribe of Levi; and he begot three daughters. By kin she was the daughter of
the sister of the mother of our Lady Mary, the mother of God in the flesh. The name of the
eldest was Mary, and she it was who was the mother of Salome, who received our Lady
Mary when she brought forth the Wonder. The name of the second was Sophia, and she it
was who was the mother of this Saint Elisabeth. The name of the youngest was Hannah,
who brought forth our Lady Mary; Salome, and Elisabeth, and our Lady Mary were sisters;
and Zachariah the priest married this righteous woman Elisabeth. And the Holy Gospel
saith concerning them that they were righteous and pure, both of them, and that they
walked in all the Law of God blamelessly, and that this righteous woman was barren. And
because of the frequent entreaties of this woman and her husband, their petition reached
God together, and God gave them a son, Saint John the Baptist, so that He might make
manifest their righteousness and their love for God, and the greatness of their Faith in
Him. Because God did not grant them their petition early in their lives, this did not cause
doubt or sorrow, on the contrary, they were persistent in their petitioning, and at length
when they had become old in their days, and were barren, they produced a son, so that
[men] might know the Divine Power. And moreover, when the time arrived wherein our
holy Lady the Virgin Mary conceived the Word of God Who existeth for ever, John, being
in his mother’s womb, preached Him, and he bowed before Him, even as his mother saith,
“The child leaped in my womb with joy and gladness when our Lady Mary came to me.”
363

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And when she and her husband Zachariah were grown old, God sent His angel Gabriel,
and announced to him concerning his son John, and informed him what would happen to
him. And this Saint Elisabeth conceived and brought forth the saint, the prophet, the
preacher and Baptist John; and her heart rejoiced at this, and the reproach of the children of
her kinsfolk was removed from her. And then she saw our Lord and Redeemer Jesus
Christ, and confessed His Godhead, and she rejoiced in making to be saved those who
believed on Him. And after this she lived in purity and righteousness even as she had
formerly done, and she died in peace. Salutation to Elisabeth.
And on this day also is commemorated our holy Lady Mary, the two-fold Virgin, the Godbearer, for on it He gave her the Covenant of Mercy and she received it from her Son, our
Redeemer Jesus Christ, in respect of him that should celebrate her commemoration, or
should call upon her name, or give alms to the poor, even if it were only [a cup of] cold
water. And the Son of this Saint Mary after He ascended into heaven, taking her pure flesh
[with Him], sat down at the right hand of His Father, having fulfilled every law of the
Incarnation, with the sole exception of sin, and overcome the sufferings of the Cross at His
own good pleasure and will, which He did for our salvation. And He left His mother Mary
in the house of John, His disciple, so that he might love her, even as He committed him to
her, saying, “Behold thy son,” and He said unto that disciple, “Behold thy mother.”
Thereupon our Lady Mary lived [there], and she used to go to the tomb of her Son, that is
to say, Golgotha, to pray there. And when the Jews saw [her] there they were filled with
wrath, and envy, and they wished to drive her away; but God hid her from their eyes. Then
they took counsel, and decided to set guards over His tomb, so that she might not come
there again and pray, but she did not cease to go there day by day, and the guards did not
see her, because the covering of the glory of her Son hid her. And always angels were
coming to minister unto her, and her Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, visited her frequently, and
fulfilled for her all her desires. Some of the angels used to take her up into the heavens and
show her the places where the saints rested, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And all the
souls of the fathers who had died from Adam until that time worshipped her, saying,
“Glory be to God, Who hath created thee flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone. In thee
we have found salvation, and thou hast become for us the haven of life from destruction
through the Son of God taking upon Himself flesh through thee.” And then the angels took
her, and brought her to her beloved Son on His throne, and the curtains, which were flames
of fire, were drawn aside on the right hand and on the left, and our Lord took her hand, and
kissed her mouth, and said unto her, “Hast thou arrived, O my mother?” And He raised
her up on to the throne of His glory, and He seated her by Him, and He described to her all
the joy and gladness which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard of, nor heart of man imagined,
which were prepared for her. And beneath the throne of glory she saw David, the King of
Israel, her father, (with all the company of the prophets, and the angels, and the souls of the
righteous, in a circle,) singing to the harp, saying, “Hearken unto me, my daughter, and
consider, and incline thine ear. Forget thy people and thy father’s house. The king hath
desired thy beauty; he is thy Lord” (Psalm xlv). And from there the angels took her to
show her the place of punishment, and they brought her to the limit of darkness, which is
prepared for Satan and his hosts, and for all those who walk in his ways. And our Lady
Mary said, “Woe is me ! Who will describe this place to the children of men, so that they
may not come hither?” And the angel said unto her, “Fear thou not, O Mary, God is with
thee, and for thy sake with those who shall come after thee.” And then the angels carried
her away and brought her into a certain place, and thereupon our Lady Mary sat down,
being exceedingly sorry for all sinners. And as it might be this day the sixteenth day of the
364

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
month of Yakatit, she stood on the Place of the Skull (Golgotha), and besought her Son,
saying, “O my Son, swear to me by God Thy Father, and by Thy Name of Christ, and [by]
the Paraclete, Thy Spirit, and by my womb which carried Thee for nine months and five
days, Thee Whom the earth cannot bear up, Thee Whom the angels cannot approach, I
adjure Thee, O my Son, by Thy going forth from me without exhaustion, and by Thy
delivery which was painless, I adjure Thee by my breasts which suckled Thee, and by my
lips which kissed Thee, I adjure Thee by my hands which embraced Thee, and by my feet
which walked with Thee, I adjure Thee by the manger wherein Thou didst lie, and by the
ragged cloths wherein Thou wast wrapped, O my Son, and Beloved One, I beseech Thee,
and entreat Thee, to hearken unto the words of my petition, and to come to me, and to
fulfill for me everything which is in my heart.” And when our holy Lady, the Virgin
Mary, the mother of the Light, had spoken thus, our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ came
down straightway, and there were with Him, surrounding Him, thousands of thousands,
and tens of thousands of tens of thousands of angels, and he said unto her, “What shall I do
for thee, Mary, My mother? What desire hast thou that thou wouldst have Me fulfill for
thee?” And our Lady the holy Virgin Mary answered and said unto her beloved Son, “O
my Beloved Son, my Lord and Redeemer, my Hope, my Refuge, upon Thee is placed my
trust. Because of Thee I was strong in the womb of my mother, and in the womb which
covered Thee, and Thou art my memorial, at all times. And now do Thou hear my prayer
and petition, and hearken unto the word of my mouth which I speak unto Thee. I Thy
mother Mary, I Thine handmaiden, on behalf of him that shall celebrate my
commemoration, and him that shall build a church in my name, or shall clothe the naked,
or visit the sick, or feed the hungry, or give drink to him that is athirst, or shall comfort the
sorrowful, or shall make the sad to rejoice, or shall write the history of my strife, or shall
sing a song at my festival; [swear to me] that God shall give him the good reward from
Thee, which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard of, nor the heart of man imagined. I beseech
and entreat Thee on behalf of all those who believe in me, to set them free from Sheol, and
to remember the hunger, and thirst, and all the trials which came upon me through Thee.”
And our Lord Jesus Christ answered and said unto her, “It shall be unto thee even as thou
sayest, and I will fulfill for thee all thy petition; I became incarnate of thee, and I swear
that I will not make any covenant with thee to be a lie.” Salutation to thee, O Book of the
Law and Covenant, like the Tables of stone.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 17
(February 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Minas the monk became a martyr. This saint was from the country of
‘Akmim (Akhmim) in Upper Egypt; his parents were Christians and they were tillers of the
ground. This saint wished to array himself in the garb of the monk, and to reject this
world, and he became a monk in one of the monasteries of the city of ‘Akmim (Akhmim);
he used to fast frequently for two days at a time, and he took no thought for his food and
drink. And after this he departed to the district of Esmunayn, and dwelt there in a
monastery for seven and twenty years, leading a life of devotion to God, and fighting the
365

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
fight; and he never went outside the door of that monastery. And when the Muslims
reigned in the land of Egypt, and he heard concerning them, and how they said, “God hath
no son of His Nature and Godhead, who sprang from Him,” he was very sorrowful because
of this thing. And having been blessed by the abbot of the monastery who prayed over
him, he went forth and departed to the city of Esmunayn, and he stood up before the
captain of the Muslim soldiers, and said unto him, “Is it true that ye say that God hath no
son of His Nature and Godhead?” And the captain said unto him, “Yea, we remove from
God this thing, and we do not confess it.” And Saint Minas said unto him, “It is right for
thee not to confess Him if He were the son of carnal union and seed, but His is not this; He
is the Light proceeding from Light, [and] God, in truth, proceeding from God, in truth.”
And the captain said unto him, “O monk, this, in our Law, is infidelity.” And the saint
answered and said unto him, “Know thou that the Holy Gospel saith, ‘He who believeth in
the Son hath everlasting life, and that he who believeth not shall not see life, but the wrath
of God shall descend upon him’” (John iii, 36). Because of this the captain was
exceedingly angry, and he ordered the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and to
hack his body in pieces, and to cast him into the river. And certain believers took his body
and prepared it carefully for burial, and they performed a service of commemoration for
him as it were this day. Salutation to Minas, Bishop of ‘Akmim (Akhmim).
Salutation to Moses, the chief of the fathers, who died on this day on Mount Nebo.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 18
(February 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father and confessor, Melanius, Archbishop of the city of
Antioch. This saint was made archbishop in the days of the reign of Constantine, the son
of Constantine the Great, and this saint was learned, and simple, and was beloved by all
men. And having been appointed and sat for thirty days, he excommunicated the followers
of Arius, and drove them out from all the churches of the city of Antioch. And when the
emperor heard of this, he sent and expelled him from his office, for the emperor was a
follower of Arius. And the elders of the city of Antioch, and the bishops and priest
gathered together, and they wrote a letter about him and sent it to the emperor, and they
asked him to restore Melanius to them; and the emperor sent to the place whereto he had
driven him, and brought him back to them, for he was ashamed before them. And when
this saint returned to the city of Antioch, he did not set aside the anathematizing and
excommunication of the men of Arius, but he excommunicated all those who believed in
their words. And he revealed their error and their blasphemy publicly, and he preached to
everyone, and made them to see clearly that the Son was of the substance of the Father,
and equal with Him in His Godhead and Being. And the followers of Arius returned and
they wrote to the emperor, and they made false accusations against this saint, and at length
they changed his heart in their favour; and the emperor sent a second time, and banished
Melanius to a country which was more remote than that to which he had banished him on
the first occasion. And when Melanius had arrived in the country whereto the emperor had
366

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
banished him, it was to him as if he were living with his people, for they had with them his
epistles, and his teaching, and his interpretations of obscure theological writings, and his
epistles from [this] remote country used to reach his flock who were in the city of Antioch,
that is the bishops and learned priests. And he preached the Holy Trinity, and the True
Faith, and [the doctrine of] the Three Hundred and Eighteen holy Fathers, and he cursed
Arius and excommunicated all those who followed him. and he lived in exile for many
years, and at length he died in peace. And behold Saint John, the Mouth of Gold (i.e.
Chrysostom), pronounced an encomium upon him on the day of his festival, and praised
him greatly, and he showed forth in it his glory and majesty, and proved that in respect of
the tribulation and ignominy which had come upon him for the True Faith, he neither fell
short of, nor was inferior to any of the holy apostles.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 19
(February 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the translation of the body of Saint Martianus the monk, from the
city of Athens to the city of Antioch. To this saint came temptation from a certain woman
who was a harlot, who wanted to commit sin with him, and to make him to fall down with
her into the net of sin. But he led her away from this, and brought her to repentance, and
into the ascetic life, and then he left her, and departed to Daset, and from that place to
many [other] cities. And when he arrived in the city of Athens, and had lived therein for a
few days, his body fell sick with a slight sickness, and he died there, as is written in the
section for the twenty-first day of Genbot. And when Saint Demetrius had been appointed
Archbishop of the city of Antioch, in the days of Falaryas, the infidel emperor, this saint
sent priests to the city of Athens, and they carried away the body of Saint Martianus and
brought it to Antioch, with great honor, and with the singing of many psalms and hymns
and dirges. And Demetrius paid honor to it and saluted it, and laid it in a coffer in the
church, and celebrated a festival in his honor, as it were this day. Salutation to Demetrius
on whom John, the Mouth of Gold (i.e. Chrysostom), pronounced an encomium.
Salutation to the translation of the body of Saint Martianus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 20
(February 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the translation of the body of Saint Martianus the monk, from the
city of Athens to the city of Antioch. To this saint came temptation from a certain woman
who was a harlot, who wanted to commit sin with him, and to make him to fall down with
367

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
her into the net of sin. But he led her away from this, and brought her to repentance, and
into the ascetic life, and then he left her, and departed to Daset, and from that place to
many [other] cities. And when he arrived in the city of Athens, and had lived therein for a
few days, his body fell sick with a slight sickness, and he died there, as is written in the
section for the twenty-first day of Genbot. And when Saint Demetrius had been appointed
Archbishop of the city of Antioch, in the days of Falaryas, the infidel emperor, this saint
sent priests to the city of Athens, and they carried away the body of Saint Martianus and
brought it to Antioch, with great honor, and with the singing of many psalms and hymns
and dirges. And Demetrius paid honor to it and saluted it, and laid it in a coffer in the
church, and celebrated a festival in his honor, as it were this day. Salutation to Demetrius
on whom John, the Mouth of Gold (i.e. Chrysostom), pronounced an encomium.
Salutation to the translation of the body of Saint Martianus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 21
(February 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer. Salutation
to thee, O Mary, thou light of life.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Gabriel, the sixty-seventh Archbishop of
the city of Alexandria. This father became a monk in his early years in the desert of Scete,
and he fought a great fight, and he devoted himself to the ascetic life for many years, with
fasting, and prayer, and prostrations, and vigils, and hunger, and thirst; and he was humble,
and simple, and loved to live by himself. One day there came into his cell a certain elder,
whose name was Maximus to be blessed by him, and Gabriel prayed over him and he went
forth to depart to his own place. And the holy elder Maximus laid hold upon him, and said
unto him, “O my son, why dost thou flee from men, for thou wilt be obliged to dwell
among many men and women”; and this father did not understand the meaning of the
words of the elder, and he wept frequently, and entreated God to deliver him from the nets
of the Enemy. And when Abba Michael, the Archbishop, his predecessor, died, they
seized this father and against his will made him archbishop, even as the elder had
prophesied concerning him. And having been appointed he did not become slothful in his
office, and he did not abandon his spiritual fight, or his strenuous ascetic life, nor his piety;
and he dwelt continually in the desert of Scete. And when affairs connected with the work
of the churches compelled him to go to the city of Alexandria and to Mesr (Cairo), he used
to go quickly, and return to the desert of Scete. When he was in the youth of his days the
lust for fornication used to bestir itself in him, and [although] he increased his fasts and
vigils in order to subdue the lust, he was unable to do so; and he confessed this to a certain
elder in the desert of Scete. And that elder said unto him, “Nothing will destroy lust except
humility, coupled with fasting, and prayer, and prostration, and vigils, and those alone will
save [a man] form it.” When he heard this he made himself a shovel of iron, and he used
to get up in the night and dress himself in mean and ragged garments, and go round into all
the cells of the monks, and clear out the offal from them and take it away, and cast it out at
368

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
a great distance from the cells. And he continued to do this kind of work for a period of
two years, when God saw his purity and the humility of his heart and removed from him
the natural lust for fornication. And this father continued to lead the ascetic life and to
fight the fight, and he admonished and taught his people, and strengthened them in the
True Faith for a period of eleven years; and he died in peace. Salutation to Gabriel for his
righteousness and faith.
And on this day also died the holy father, Abba Zachariah, Bishop of the city of Saha.
This saint was one of the children of those skilled in the Law, and his father abandoned the
Law, and was made a priest; and his name was John. And when the son of John had grown
up, and had studied the profane learning and the philosophy of the pagans, and the Law of
the Church, the captain of the king’s host took him and made him a scribe in the house of
the king. And he had a friend in the Law, whose name was Ptolemy, and who was
governor of the city of Saha; and they agreed together to go to the desert of Scete and to
become monks. And at that time there visited them a certain monk from the monastery of
Saint Abba John of the desert of Scete, and they made an agreement to go there with him;
and when the governors heard of this they sent and prevented their going. And having
tarried a few days they saw a vision, and it seemed as if one said unto them, “Why do you
not fulfill the vow which ye have vowed to God?
And they rose up straightway, and went forth in secret, but they did not know the way, and
a monk appeared unto them and guided them, and brought them to the monastery of Saint
Abba John, of the desert of Scete. And when the governors heard of their departure, they
agreed that they would obtain an order from the king and send it with messengers to make
them to come down from the monastery; but God scattered their counsel. And when
Zachariah and Ptolemy had become monks, they fought the fight and followed the ascetic
life strenuously, especially Zachariah. And in their days lived the elders Abba Abraham
and Abba Ga’Argi, and they used to visit the young men, and give them advice concerning
all their works. When the Bishop of the city of Soha died, the people remembered Saint
Abba Zachariah, and they wrote a letter to the archbishop on his behalf, asking him to
appoint him to be their bishop. And the archbishop sent to the desert of Scete and had
Zachariah brought against his will, and he appointed him Bishop of the city of Soha. And
whilst the archbishop was laying his hand upon him, he saw the power of God descend
upon him, and his face was wreathed with light. And when he came to the throne of his
office the people rejoiced in him with great joy, and they went out to meet him as [the men
of old] met our Redeemer on the festival of Hosanna {Palm Sunday); and the Church was
resplendent through him. And this father composed many Homilies, and Admonitions, and
works on Doctrine; and his voice was exceedingly sweet, and was filled with the grace of
the Holy Ghost. And he sat upon his archiepiscopal throne forty years, and he was wellpleasing to God and died in peace. Salutation to Zachariah.
And on this day also Saint Onesimus, the priest, and the disciple of Paul the apostle,
became a martyr. When Paul the apostle had preached in the city of Rome, Philemon
departed from the city of Rome and took with him among his servants this Onesimus. And
Satan led him into error and corrupted his heart, and he stole money from his master
Philemon and from other men like him; and when he knew that his master was going to
punish him, he fled and came to the city of Rome. By the Will of God he came to the
apostle, and heard his teaching, and his teaching entered his heart, and he believed through
him, and the fear of God came into his heart. And he remembered what he had done, and
369

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
how he had stolen money from his master and from others, and he had nothing of it left
with him, which he could restore to them of their money. And he was sorry, and he came
to Saint Paul and told him everything which had happened to him. And the apostle said
unto him, “Fear not, neither let thy heart be sorrowful.” And he wrote an epistle unto
Philemon his master; and this epistle is one of the Epistles of the Apostle Paul. And Paul
commanded him concerning Saint Onesimus, and he said unto him, “Protect him, for he
hath become a disciple of Christ, and my son in the preaching of the Gospel.” And he
commanded him concerning Onesimus, and said unto him, “Forgive him his sin in stealing
thy money, and receive him as myself. And if he hath wronged thee in aught, and he ought
to repay thee, set it to my account. I, Paul, have written it with mine own hand; howbeit I
say not that thou art thyself in debt to me.” And when this Saint Onesimus came with the
letter to his master Philemon, he rejoiced in his faith and repentance, and did to him even
as the Apostle Paul had commanded him. And Philemon added to his great love for
Onesimus, and he commanded [his steward to give] to him much money for him to take,
and he would take nothing whatsoever of it, and he said, “I have become a rich man in
Christ.” And when Philemon bade Onesimus farewell, and set him on his road, and
Onesimus returned to the city of Rome, and ministered unto Paul, the Apostle, until the
time of his martyrdom. And Paul praised this saint and made him a priest, and the
Apostles praise him and mention him in the seventy-seventh Canon, and in the fifty-third
Canon, and they say of him that he was a “faithful priest.” And after the martyrdom of the
Apostle Paul, the captain of the host of the Emperor of Rome took this saint, and banished
him to an island, and he dwelt there and taught the men the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And they beat him severely and made him to suffer agony, and then they broke his thighs,
and he departed to God. Salutation to Onesimus the disciple of Paul.
And on this day also died Abba Peter, Bishop of Damascus.
[And on this day also died Abba ‘Akyos, and Abba Gabriel, Bishop of Ethiopia.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 22
(March 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Maruna, the bishop. And on this day also took place
the translation of the bodies of the saints who became martyrs in the country of Persia, in
the days of Diocletian, the infidel. And because of the many works, and virtues, and
righteousness of Maruna the bishop, the Emperor Theodosius the Great, the father of
Honorius and Arcadius, sent him to the King of Persia and with him were many gifts
because of the love which existed between Theodosius and the King of Persia. And when
Maruna arrived, the King of Persia paid him very great honor, and he lodged him in one of
the palaces of his kingdom. And when this saint heard that the daughter of the king was
ridden by an evil spirit, he summoned her, and she stood up before him, and he prayed
over her; and he healed his daughter, and Sapor the king rejoiced in him with very great
joy. And the saint demanded from him the bodies of the saints, who had become martyrs
370

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
in the country of Persia, and the king gave them to him, and he built a church and laid their
bodies in it. And the king built a great fortress in the city, and he built inside the fortress a
quarter, and called it by the name of Saint Maruna, which is Merfakina. And after this, the
saint returned to the Emperor Theodosius, and he dwelt in the city of Rome two years, and
died as it were this day, on which was consecrated the church of those martyrs. And the
festival of the saint, and the festival of the consecration of the church, are celebrated
together on the same day, that is to say, this day. Salutation to Maruna the excellent envoy
and bishop.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of Abba Bula, and three hundred
[and eighty martyrs], and Nicolaus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 23
(March 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became a martyr Saint Eusebius, the son of the holy and blessed Basilides, the
captain of the royal troops of the city of Antioch, and the father of kings. And this saint
was in the war against the men of the country of the Persians, and when Diocletian denied
our Lord Jesus Christ, Basilides sent to this son Eusebius, and told him that Diocletian had
denied Christ. And this saint summoned his kinsfolk, the saints and men of the palace, that
is to say, ‘Abadir, and Justus, and Claudius, and Theodore from the East, and he told them
how Diocletian had denied our Lord Christ, and how he worshipped idols; and they were
exceedingly sorry. And the holy and excellent man Eusebius said unto them, “I want to
shed my blood for the Name of Christ,” and all those saints agreed with him in this
excellent decision, and they swore each to the other that they would do so. And when the
Romans had conquered their enemies, and had returned to the city of Antioch with victory
and joy, Diocletian and his soldiers went out and met them, and Khermanos (Romanus),
the father of Victor, advised the emperor to have the saints brought before him, and to
fetch idols for them to worship. And the emperor did as Khermanos (Romanus) advised
him, and he summoned the saints to him, and said unto them, “Ye know well that I love
you exceedingly, I want you to make my heart to rejoice, and to worship Apollo.” And
when Saint Eusebius heard this he was exceedingly angry, and he drew his sword and
wished to kill the emperor, and the emperor fled from him and hid himself. But this saint
killed many of the emperor’s companions, and had it not been that Basilides restrained his
son and his kinsmen the saints, they would have hilled all the emperor’s soldiers. After
this Khermanos (Romanus) advised the emperor to send Eusebius to the country of Egypt,
and to let the officers kill him there, [saying], “If he remaineth here in this city he will stir
up the men of the city against thee at all times, and thou wilt not be able to do anything
when thou wishest.” And the emperor wrote and commanded [the governor] to send
Eusebius to the country of Egypt, to Lolyanos, the governor of Keft (Coptos), and he sent
him away as the emperor commanded. And when Eusebius arrived in Keft (Coptos), the
governor tortured him very severely on the wheel, and he cut off his members, and after
this he beat him severely, and after this he boiled him in a cauldron. And our Lord sent to
371

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him His angel, who strengthened him under his tribulation, and comforted him, and healed
his wounds, and raised him up whole and uninjured. And then the angel caught away his
soul to the Garden of Delight, and the saint saw the abode of the martyrs, and the saints,
and the righteous, and he saw the places which God had prepared for him, and his father,
and his brother, and his kinsfolk, and his soul rejoiced exceedingly. And after this the
governor commanded the soldiers to burn him in a furnace outside the city of ‘Ehnasa, and
they burnt him as the governor had commanded them; and the angel of God came down to
him in the red-hot furnace, and made the flame to be as cold as ice, and he brought Saint
Eusebius out of the fiery furnace whole and uninjured. And the officers and the judges
advised the governor, saying, “O governor, command the soldiers to cut off the head of
this man, and have rest from him”; and the emperor commanded and the soldiers cut off
the head of this Eusebius with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Eusebius, the son of Basilides, the general.
[On this day is commemorated ‘Awsegneyos, the chief of the Council, and the deputy of
Theodore, in the country of the East.]
Salutation to ‘Agabitos (Agapetus).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 24
(March 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Agapetus the bishop. This holy father lived in the days of
the Emperors Diocletian and Maximianus, the deniers [of Christ]. The parents of this saint
were believing Christians, and they taught him the doctrine of the Church and he was made
a deacon. And after this he left his parents and went to a monastery, and he ministered
unto the monks, the holy elders who were in it, and he learned from them good piety, and
the strict observance of the ascetic life, and the knowledge of how to fight the fight; and he
fasted frequently and he prayed and kept vigil ceaselessly. And he used to feed himself
daily on the wasted lupines, after he had fasted from dawn until sunset. When he wanted
to fight against sleep he ate for a period of eighty days ashes mixed with lupines, and his
strength was increased whilst he was fighting the fight of the ascetic fight, and he
ministered to the wants of the company of the monks, and called them his masters. And he
carried out to perfection every practice and observance of the ascetic life, and God wrought
many great signs and miracles by him, among which are the following: He healed a
certain maiden of a sickness, with which she had been sick for many years; through the
severity of her sickness she was dried up like wood, and the physicians were unable to heal
her. By his prayer he slew a huge serpent, which had destroyed many men. He drove off
from men and from lions, unclean spirits, and many severe and painful diseases. And
Lekatinu the governor heard of his devotion to God, and his excellences, and his
righteousness, and the strength of his body, and he had him brought against his will to
Kuerh, and he made him a soldier in his army against his will. But he ceased not to devote
himself to ascetic practices, and to fasting and prayer, nay he even added to his practice of
372

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
righteousness and ascetic excellence. And he remained [a soldier] for a few days only, for
God blotted out Diocletian, the infidel, and the righteous and God-loving Emperor
Constantine reigned [in his stead]. And this saint tried to find a pretext for leaving the
army and the service of the emperor. Now by the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ, there was
with Constantine a certain young man who was of goodly appearance, and whose deeds
were good, and the emperor loved him exceedingly. And Satan the Evil One took
possession of the young man, and tortured him very severely, and the young man cried out
by day and by night. And when one of those who knew Saint Agapetus saw him, he said
unto him, “O youth, if thou couldst obtain the help of Saint Agapetus, he would heal thee
of thy sickness.” And the youth said unto him, “Is it possible for a man to attempt to do
this being only a soldier in the Imperial Army?” And the friend of Agapetus told the youth
all about his spiritual fight, and his righteousness, and said unto him, “Verily he is able to
heal thee of thy sickness.” And the young man cried out, saying, “Bring hither to me Saint
Agapetus, the soldier, that he may heal me of this severe sickness.” And when the emperor
knew this he commanded his servants to bring Saint Agapetus, and when he had come
before him he prayed over the young man, and made over him the sign of the Honorable
Cross, and God healed him of his sickness. And the emperor rejoiced in this with great
joy, and he paid great honor to the saint, and he said unto him, “Lay upon me whatsoever
thou wishest me to pay, and I will do so.” And the saint said unto him, “Release me from
military service,” and the emperor released him, and sent him away, and the saint returned
to the place wherein he had lived formerly. And he lived by himself, and devoted himself
to God and to spiritual fighting, which was much more severe than formerly, for many
years; and the bishop of the neighboring city made him a priest. And when that bishop
died, the people asked the archbishop to make Agapetus their bishop, and he did so. And
Agapetus shepherded his rational flock carefully and well, and God gave him the gift of
prophecy, and the gift of working many signs and wonders. And he rebuked sinners for
committing sin in secret, and he rebuked the priests for forsaking the teaching of the
people; and he rebuked them and repelled them from the sanctuary until they repented.
And it is found written in the history of his strife that during his lifetime he performed one
hundred miracles, and among them he made a river to stop flowing, and by means of his
cross turned it into another bed. And he opened the eyes of a blind man, and cleansed a
leper, and healed many sick folk, and then he died in peace.
And on this day also [Timothy, of the city of Gaza, and] Saint Matyas, of the city of
Cyprus, became martyrs. Salutation to [Timothy, of Gaza], and to Matyas (Minas ?), of
the city of Cyprus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 25
(March 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Ausanius, and Philemon, and a certain virgin whose name was Likaia, became
martyrs. These saints believed through Paul, the Apostle, when he was in the city of
Phrygia. And when the infidels made a festival in honor of the idol Artemis, which they
373

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
called by the name of the star of Venus, these saints gathered together, and went into the
house of idols to see them, and to mock at their infidelity and error. And when they saw
the man sacrificing to the idols, the flame of divine love waxed great in their hearts, and
they went out of the temple, and entered the holy Church of Christ, and added to their
praises and exhortation of our Lord Christ. And a certain man of those who were there
heard them, and he heard in their talk the house of idols mentioned, and how they mocked
at the people, and at their idols. And when information about this was laid before the
governor, he mounted his horse and came to the church, and some of the believers took to
flight. And the governor seized these saints, and he made iron rods red-hot in the fire, and
thrust them into the sides of the saints. Then he cast Saint Ausanius into a well and the
soldiers stoned him with stones until he delivered up his soul. And Saint Philemon and
Saint Likaia he tortured severely many times, and they asked God to receive their souls;
and He accepted their petition, and took their souls, and they received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And behold mention of their faith, and of their
martyrdom, is made in the Gadla Hawaryat. Salutation to you, O Ausanius, and Philemon,
and Lokala.
And on this day also Saints Kona, a deacon of the city of Rome, and Minas, of the city of
Kus, and Delmadius, of the city of Gaza, became martyrs. Salutation to Kona, and Minas,
and to Delmadius.
Salutation to Kumuta, and to Antonius.
[On this day are commemorated Damayelnos, and Reginos, the martyrs, and Antony, that
is to say Raweh, the Koreishite, of the nobles of the new Arabs.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 26
(March 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the righteous man Hosea the prophet, and he was also called ‘Ozya. This
righteous man prophesied in the days of five kings, that is to say, Amos and Uzziah, and
Jotham and Ahaz and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah. And he said marvelous things in his
prophecy, and he rebuked the children of Israel, and called them children of
whoremongers. And he made them to know that God would not turn back His wrath from
them, and that He would not have compassion upon them, and that He hath rejected us.
And he said, “If the number of the children of Israel be like the sand of the sea which
cannot be counted, only a few of them shall be left.” And he prophesied concerning the
belief of the Gentiles in God, [saying], “I will call those who are not My people, and I will
make them My people, and they shall call Me their God.” And he prophesied concerning
the Passion of our Redeemer, and His Resurrection, and saith, “My redemption by His
blood is before Him.” And he saith also, “He who slew us, and He who broke us, shall
make us to live after two days, and shall raise us up on the third day. And He knoweth our
course in the knowledge of God.” And he spoke also concerning the destruction of the
domination of death, and concerning the breaking of the goad (sting) of Hell. And he
374

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
prophesied for a period of seventy years and having pleased God he died at a good old
age. Salutation to Hosea who preached the coming of Christ.
On this day also Saint Sadok and the saints who were with him and who were one hundred
and twenty and eight in number, became martyrs. Behram, King of Persia, required of
these saints to worship the sun, and Saint Sadok answered and said unto him, “I did not
come forth from my mother’s womb to worship the sun, which appeareth, but to worship
its Creator.” And Behram the king answered and said unto him, “Hath this sun a god?”
And the saint said unto him, “Yea, Christ is [its] god”; and the king commanded the
soldiers to cut off his head. And the saint stood up and prayed, and entreated God, and
then he bowed his holy head and they cut it off with a sword, and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And light from heaven descended upon him,
and those who were there saw it, and they all cried out, saying, “We are Christians; we
believe in our Lord Jesus Christ.” And the king commanded the soldiers to cut off all their
heads with the sword [and they did so], and they received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Sadok. [The Bodleian MS. says that the martyrs
were 2008.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 27
(March 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Eustathius, Archbishop of the city of Antioch. This
saint lived in the days of the Emperor Constantine the Great, and the whole world was
filled completely with his divine teaching. And when the Council of the Saints assembled
in the city of Nicea, this father was one of the presidents of the Council, and he agreed with
the fathers, and they excommunicated and drove out Arius and his companions, who were
‘Awsabius of ‘Amid, and Nar’Isos, Bishop of the city of Nicea. And he proclaimed by the
Holy Spirit the True Faith which the holy fathers of the Council proclaimed, and he drew
up with them the Canon and the Law, which are written in the churches and are well
known among all Christian peoples; and afterwards, the Council of the saints drew up the
Law of the Church in their own countries. And the infidels who had been cut off from
their Episcopal offices went forth, and after a few days they pretended that they wished to
depart to Jerusalem. And they came into the city of Antioch and they gathered together in
the house of a certain woman who was a harlot, and having promised to give her much
money, they taught her to go into the church, and to speak lies against this saint. And she
said unto the priests and the people, “This father hath committed fornication with me, and
[this] is the boy, which I bare him, and he is his son.” And she took the money from them,
and did as they had taught her. And those wicked men in their craftiness made a pact with
that woman and accused her of speaking lies against the saint, and they debated with her,
and said unto her, “Thou art a liar, and dost speak lies against this saint, and we will
neither believe thee, nor accept thy word against him, unless thou takest an oath by the
Holy Gospel that it is this saint who committed fornication with thee; if thou dost not
swear we will not believe thee.” And the woman swore by the Holy Gospel, according as
375

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
those wicked men had taught her. And thereupon those wicked men said, “Now that thou
hast sworn an oath, the whole matter is complete.” And after this those wicked men
passed judgment upon this saint, and they cut him off from his Episcopal office, and then
they sent a letter to the Emperor Constantine, and they calumniated the saint to him, and
said unto him, “Behold, the united priesthood have assembled against him, and they have
cut him off from his office, because of the fornication which he committed; do what thou
pleasest to him.” And Constantine thought that what they said was true, and he sent and
banished this saint to the city of ‘Etrakes, and he died there in exile. Woe be unto the souls
of those men who of their evil disposition separated the Son of God from His Godhead,
and drove out this saint from his office, by means of the evil pretext which their teacher
Satan had taught them. And they became associates of a harlot, and they entreated her so
well that at length she uttered lies against the holy man, [saying] that he had committed
fornication with her, and they made her swear [this] on the Holy Gospel. But God was not
ignorant about her or them, for after they had driven the holy man into exile the woman fell
sick of a severe sickness, which lasted a long time. And at length her body withered, and
fell into utter decay; and she knew that the severe sickness which caused her tribulation
had come because of the lies which she had uttered against the saint; and she drew nigh to
death. And when her sickness increased she confessed before all the men of the city of
Antioch, and said unto them, “Saint Eustathius is innocent of this charge. These wicked
men gave me much money, and taught me to utter lies against him, and I swore an oath
falsely on the Holy Gospel. The sin to which I swore I committed with another man whose
name was Eustathius, like that of the saint, and those men taught me to swear the oath, and
when I did so I thought in my heart of that Eustathius with whom I had committed
fornication, though I uttered the name of this saint freely with my mouth.” And when she
had confessed her sin before all the people of the city of Antioch, they were exceedingly
sad. And at the time of the Eucharist, the priests of the city of Antioch omitted to mention
the name of this saint, and when they had heard the confession of this woman, they
mentioned the name of this saint at the time of the Eucharist. And Saint John, the Mouth
of Gold (i.e. Chrysostom), praised this saint in many Homilies and writings which he
pronounced on him on the day of his festival. Salutation to Eustathius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 28
(March 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day saint Theodore, the Roman, became a martyr. This saint was from the city of
‘Astir, and he lived in the days of the infidel Emperors Maximus and Masabos, who heard
that he did not agree with them in their infidelity. And they had him brought before them
and commanded him to worship idols, and to sacrifice to them, but he would not obey
them, and he said unto them, “I will not worship unclean idols, for I worship my Lord
Jesus Christ, the son of the Living God, the Creator of the heavens, and the earth, and all
that is therein.” Then they made him promises of many things, if he would worship their
idols, but he neither accepted their promises, nor submitted to their words, and he cursed
both them and their idols. And straightway they were wroth with him, and they
376

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
commanded the soldiers to torture him with every kind of torture; and they tortured him on
the wheel, and they cut off his limbs, and they burned him with fire, and then they beat him
severely with whips, and he endured all these tortures through the might of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which strengthened him. When they were tired of torturing him they cut off his
head with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. Salutation to Theodore.
Salutation to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Salutation to the companions of Theodore, etc.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

YEKATIT 29
(March 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Bolikarbos became a martyr. This saint was Bishop of the city of
‘Armoni (Smyrna) and he sat upon his Episcopal throne for many days, until he became a
very old man; and he composed many Admonitions and Homilies on the festival of the
Holy Birth, and on Death, and on Hell, and on the Judgment which was to come upon
sinners, and on our holy Lady the Virgin Mary, and on the operation of the wisdom of our
Redeemer, and on the holy festivals; and he brought to God many souls by his life-giving
teachings. And days of tribulation and persecution having come upon Christian people, he
longed to shed his holy blood for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he commanded
his people and taught them to be strong in the True and Holy Faith. And he spoke unto
them, and told them that after this they would never see his face again, because he longed
to shed his holy blood; and they all wept and sorrowed because of their separation from
him. And they said unto him, “We will not let thee go, O our father, and leave us orphans;
we will give our souls for thee.” And when they were unable to hold him back, they let
him go, and he went out from them, and departed to the governor, and he stood up before
him and confessed the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the governor tortured him
greatly. And the people said unto the saint, “Spare thyself. Thou art a very old man.”
And the people begged and entreated him to go out of the city, and to please their hearts he
said unto them, “I will go out secretly.” That night he saw a vision, and it seemed that a
man said unto him, “Why has thou forgotten thy good resolution to become a martyr, and
hast turned back?” And he appeared before the governor, who commanded the soldiers to
cut off his head, and they cut off his head with the sword, and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And certain believing men took his body, and
prepared it for burial in the manner befitting a bishop, and they laid him in a tomb.
Salutation to thee, O Bolikarbos.
Salutation to Thy Birth, O Jesus Christ.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

377

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
YEKATIT 30
(March 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day was found the head of John the Baptist. Now Herod the infidel commanded
the soldiers to cut off the head of the saint, and when they had cut it off, and brought it to
him, he showed the people that he was sorry for what he had done to Saint John, and he
left the holy head of Saint John in his house. And when Herod had put away the daughter
of ‘Aorta and taken Herodias, his brother’s wife, the daughter of ‘Aorta came to her father,
and she wept before him, and told him what Herod had done to her. And ‘Aorta rose up,
and gathered together his soldiers, and he came to the country of Galilee, and plundered all
their cities and burned them with fire. When the Emperor Tiberius Caesar heard this thing
[he enquired] and the people told him that ‘Aorta had done this thing because Herod had
put away his daughter. And Tiberius Caesar was wroth with Herod because he had killed
the man who was held to be a great prophet by all the people of the cities, and had taken
his brother’s wife, and because his father-in-law ‘Aorta had plundered and laid waste all
the cities of Galilee. And Tiberius Caesar sent, and had Herod brought to him to the city
of Rome, and Herodias with him, after he had buried the head of Saint John in his house.
And when Herod came to Tiberius Caesar, the emperor removed him from his
governorship, and seized all his money, and sent him to the country of ‘Andeles, where he
died an evil death. And the emperor sent, and laid waste his house, and he made it visible
to everyone who looked thereat; and his house was left a heap of waste, with the exception
of the porch, which had no doors (?), and the pilgrims used to live there. And at that time
two men who were poor in respect of money, but rich in the matter of the Faith, went to
Jerusalem to worship, and to fast the Holy Fast (i.e. Lent). Now this took place many
years later. And when the evening was come they went and dwelt in the ruined house of
Herod, and Saint John appeared unto one of them in a dream, and told him his name, and
the place wherein was his head; and he commanded him to take it and carry it to his house;
when the man woke up from his dream, he told his companion what he had seen. And they
rose up together, and came to that place which Saint John had pointed out to him, and they
found a vessel therein. And when they had opened it, there ascended to them the odor of a
perfume, which was very pleasant, and they found in it the holy head of Saint John, and
they were blessed thereby. And they put it back into the vessel, and fastened up the mouth
thereof, as it was at first, and the man took it with him to his house, and paid it very great
honor, and kept a lamp burning before it continually. And when death drew nigh unto that
man he told his sister about the holy head, and commanded her to treat it as he had done;
and she paid honor to the holy head, and kept a lamp burning before it. And the head of
Saint John was handed on from man to man, until at length it came to a certain man who
was an Arian, and who thought that the head would perform miracles for him, although he
was of the faith of Arius, the infidel. And Saint John raised up against him a man who was
greater than he, and this man drove him away from that place, and that place lay waste
until Abba Cyril was made Bishop of Jerusalem, and Abba Anianus Bishop of the city of
Khamd. And Saint John appeared unto Abba Anianus during his sleep, and told him the
place wherein was his holy head, and Abba Anianus went and fetched it up, as it were on
this day, the thirtieth day of the month Ginbot. This is the second time they found it--on
the thirtieth day of the month Yakatit.
378

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And John, the Mouth of Gold (i.e. Chrysostom), saith something different to this, that is to
say: When Herod commanded the soldiers, and they had cut off the head of the saint
whilst he was in prison, they brought it to him, and he gave it to the daughter of Herodias
on a platter. And when that unclean harlot touched it, the hair of the head stood up, and
the holy head leaped up into the air, and was crying out and saying, “It is not right for thee
to take thy brother’s wife,” and it continued to fly about like an eagle, and to utter these
words for a period of fifteen years, when it ceased and was buried in the Sea of Arabia.
And the pilgrims used to dwell in that place. And by the Will of God there came to that
place two righteous and believing pilgrims, who were brothers, and they dwelt in that
place. And Saint John appeared unto them, and told them to take up his holy head. And
they took up his head from that place, and they carried it away with them to their house,
and paid it great honor. Salutation to thy head, O Saint John.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

379

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE SEVENTH MONTH
MEGABIT 01
(March 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Barkosos (Praxius) became bishop of the city of Jerusalem. This good
father was appointed in the days of Alexander Caesar, and he loved the Christians, and this
holy father was perfect in all his works. And God having chosen him for the office of
Bishop of Jerusalem, he pastured his people well and truly, like the Apostles. He had been
sitting only a very few days when Alexander died, and after him reigned Maximianus
Caesar, who afflicted the Christian people with grievous tribulation, and he slew very
many of them, some being bishops. And some of them betook themselves to flight, and
forsook their native lands. This father fled to the desert, and his people could not find him,
and they set over themselves a bishop whose name was Dios. Then Dios died, and they set
over themselves another bishop whose name was Agradinus. And when the days of
persecution had passed by, this Abba Barkisos (Praxius) sat on his Episcopal throne. And
he became weak and feeble, and he aged very much, and he asked his congregation to
appoint themselves another bishop, but they refused. Now in those days there was a
certain man whose name was Iskander (Alexander), Bishop of the city of Cappadocia, and
he came to pray in Jerusalem, and to return to his native country; and having finished his
work and completed the days [of his visit] he wished to return to his native country. And
behold, a voice was heard in the church on the day of the Resurrection of our Lord, saying,
“Get ye out to a certain gate of the city of Jerusalem, and the first man who cometh out
there from, him seize and seat on the throne with Barkisos (Praxius) to assist him in his
Episcopal work.” And when the congregation had gone forth, and had arrived at the gate,
they found Iskander (Alexander), and they seized him against his will, and seated him on
the Episcopal throne with Abba Barkisos (Praxius), to assist him; and he sat with him until
he died. And all the days of the episcopate of this Abba Barkisos (Praxius) were thirty-six
years, and all the days of his life were one hundred and sixteen years. And he was well
pleasing unto God, and he died in peace.
And on this day also is commemorated the holy martyr Iskander (Alexander). This holy
man was from the city of Rome, and Maximianus tortured him very severely, because he
would not be subject unto him, and would not offer up sacrifice to his idols. He hung him
up by his hands, and tied a very large and heavy stone to his feet, and he beat him cruelly,
and he made holes in his temples, and placed lighted torches in them. And when, even
under these tortures, Iskander (Alexander) refused to submit to his authority, Maximianus
ordered his men to cut off his head; and they cut it off with a sword. And he received the
crow of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven.
And on this day are commemorated Mercurius the bishop, and the death of Matusala
(Methuselah) the son of Henok, who begot Lameh. And the days of Matusala
(Methuselah) were 969 years.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

380

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 02
(March 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy and blessed Abba Makarawi, the bishop, became a martyr. This
father was of the people of the city of ‘Esmun Zarays, in the south of Egypt; he was one of
its nobles, and was appointed Bishop of the city of Nakyos. When the days of tribulation
came, a royal judge whose name was Yofanyos arrived in the city, in order to torture the
Christian people. And he heard the report of this holy bishop, Abba Makarawi, and he sent
a message to the people to bring him to him. And before this holy father came into the
judge’s presence, he entered the church and went to the holy altar, and lifted up his hands,
and prayed. Then he laid the sacred possessions, and the holy vestments for the
consecration of the Eucharist in a certain place, inside the sanctuary. And he begged and
entreated our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory, to protect the Church, and he cried out
as he wept loudly, “O ye gates of the daughter of Zion, who will not permit the light of the
sun to rise upon you? Guard ye the sacred possessions of the sanctuary of God.” Then he
went out and departed with the royal messengers, and arrived before the judge, who asked
him his name, and what city he came from, and what his occupation was. When the judge
learnt that he was Bishop of the city of Nakyos, he commanded his men to beat him, and to
degrade him, and to melt silver and lead, and to cast the molten metal into his face. And
God gave him strength to endure, and fortified him, and raised him up safe and uninjured.
After this the judge sent him to Herminius, governor of the city of Alexandria, and he
commanded his men to shut him up in prison, and they did so. And God wrought very
many signs and wonders by his hands. And among them was the healing of the son of
Julius, [governor of] the city of ‘Akfahas, whose name was Eucharitus and who was
paralyzed in his feet and hands; and the holy man prayed over him and he was healed of
his sickness. After this he consecrated the Offering in the house of Julius, and
administered to those in it the Holy Mysteries; and the people made an agreement with
Julius that he should bury his body, and write the story of his fight. And when Herminius,
the governor, heard of the signs and wonders, which Abba Makarawi wrought, he
commanded his men to torture him. [They broke him on] the wheel, and cut off his
members, and cast him as food to the lions, and threw him into the sea, and hurled him into
a red-hot oven. And in all these tortures the holy man was victorious, and he was strong in
the strength of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory! And He raised him up sound and
uninjured. There was a certain sister, a virgin, a ministrant in the church of our Lady
Mary, and she had two brothers, one of whom was called John and the other Isaac. And
they came to the holy man whilst he was in prison, and they wept before him, saying,
“Thou hast been a father to us in the place of our own father. Why wilt thou go and leave
us widows and orphans?” And the holy man comforted them, and sent them back to their
houses. And Julius advised the governor, saying, “Write down the story of the fight of this
elder, and be at peace.” And he accepted his words, and commanded his men to cut off the
head of Abba Makarawi, and they cut off his head with a sword, and he receive the crown
of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven. And the blessed Julius took his holy body, and
prepared it for burial, and swathed it in splendid wrappings embroidered in gold, and he
laid a cross of gold on his breast, and sent it with his slaves to the city of Nikyos. There
was a fair wind, and the boat sailed swiftly, and it came and stopped by the gate of the city
‘Esmun Zerays; and the sailors wished to move the boat, but they were unable to do so.
381

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And when they had toiled hard, a voice went forth from the body of the holy elder, saying,
“This is the place wherein God is pleased that my body shall rest.” And they made this
known to the people of the city, who went out to it, carrying palm branches; and they
carried it in with great reverence and laid it in their city. And all the days of his life were
one hundred and thirty-one years. Of these he passed eight years in learning the Books of
the Holy Church, and he spent twenty-four years in completing his knowledge of the
ordinances of the office of deacon. Then he was appointed priest, and held this office of
thirty years. After this he was consecrated bishop, and he held this office for sixty-nine
years. And he finished his good fight, and received the crown of life from our Lord Jesus
Christ.
And on this day also died Gregory, the seer of things hidden, of the city of Roha
(Eddessa). This Gregory was in his early life a sinner, and a man of violence. Then he
turned to God, and became a monk, and he contended strenuously until God showed him
the abode of the righteous, and their abundant joy, and the sufferings and tortures of each
of the damned.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 03
(March 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the blessed and holy Abba Cosmas, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria;
he was the fifty-eighth archbishop of that city. This father was righteous, and pure, and
exceedingly merciful and compassionate and he was learned in the Books of the Church,
and in the interpretations thereof. And God chose him for the archiepiscopacy, and to sit
upon the throne of Mark the Evangelist, and he was enthroned in the eighteenth year of
Makter, King of Egypt. And having been enthroned he tended the flock of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to Whom be glory, in the fear of God and with wisdom. And he set aside certain of
the dues, which were rightly his, and gave them to the poor, and the cost of building
churches was defrayed by him. When Satan saw him fighting the good fight, he did not
leave him unhated, on the contrary, he contrived to bring great sorrow upon him, through
his own act, in consecrating as Bishop of the country of Ethiopia a man whose name was
Peter. Now the bishop, Abba Peter, arrived in Ethiopia, and after he had been sitting a few
days, the King of Ethiopia fell sick. And he summoned the bishop, Abba Peter, to his
presence, and brought his two sons before him, and taking the royal crown off his own
head, he gave it to the bishop, Abba Peter, and said unto him, “Behold, I am going to my
Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory! And behold, my two sons are before thee. After my
death appoint as king the one of them which thou knowest would rule the kingdom best.”
When the King of Ethiopia was dead, the bishop, and the governors, and the generals, and
the royal army, took counsel together, and it was said among them, “The younger son will
be far better for the kingdom than the elder.” And the bishop appointed the younger son to
be king, and seated him upon the royal throne for a few days. In those days Satan entered
into the heart of two monks from the country of Syria, and they went about from one place
to another until they came to the monastery of Abba Antonius, and they dwelt therein for a
382

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
few days, but were driven out because of the evil of their works. And the two of them
made an agreement together, that one of them should be made a bishop, and that the other
should assist his companion. And they rose up, and came to the country of Ethiopia, and
they forged lying documents which they carried with them, and these documents declared
that the two monks had come from father Abba Cosmas, Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. And they went on to say, “We have heard that there hath cone unto you a
certain man whose name is Peter, and that he hath made himself bishop. Now we have not
consecrated him, and we have not sent him to you; on the contrary, he is an impostor.
Now as concerneth the man who shall come to you with this letter, and whose name is
Minas, he is in truth a bishop. We have consecrated him and we send him to you.” And
the monks wrote also in that document, saying, “Peter, the false bishop, hath crowned king
the younger prince, and hath set aside the elder prince, which thing is not right; Peter is a
man of iniquity.” And these two false and wicked monks, Minas and Victor, before they
wrote the forged letter came to Peter, the bishop, and asked him to give them gold, but he
would not give them anything whatsoever. And Satan taught them how to carry out this
foul and wicked work, and they took the forged letters to the elder prince, who was sitting
by himself in a certain place, and a few men were waiting upon him. When he had read
these forged letters he rejoiced exceedingly, and he gathered together to him a very large
number of soldiers, and read the forged letters before them. And he made war upon his
brother, the king, and he put him in fetters and he himself reigned [in his stead]. And he
likewise put Peter the bishop in fetters, and carried him off to a far city, and he seated the
impostor Minas on the Episcopal throne in his stead. After a few days the impostors Minas
and Victor quarreled, and Victor stole everything there was in the bishop’s house in works,
which were not well pleasing unto God. And when Cosmas the Archbishop heard what
Minas, the liar, had done, he was exceedingly sorry, and he wrote a deed of expulsion and
anathematized and excommunicated him. When the King of Ethiopia heard this he was
exceedingly sorry, and he seized Minas the liar and killed him, and he sent a messenger
bidding Peter the bishop to return from exiled, but they found that he had died in exile.
And Cosmas the Archbishop was wroth, and he wanted to consecrate a bishop for the
Ethiopians, but his successors Abba Macarius, and Abba Theophanius, and Abba Minas,
and Abba Abraham, would not do so. And the King of Ethiopia took the assistant of Peter,
the Bishop, and said unto him, “Sit thou instead of thy teacher, and be bishop.” And he
entreated the king, saying, “It is not right for thee that I should do this, and I will not
transgress the Canon of the Apostles, but let me go to Egypt, and I will beseech the
archbishop to consecrate a bishop for you, and I will return to you.” And the king would
not allow him to go to the country of Egypt, but he took him against his will, and he
arrayed him in Episcopal vestments, and he performed Episcopal functions until the days
of Abba Philotheus, the Archbishop. And Abba Cosmas lived to a very old age, and all his
days were filled with peace and prosperity. And he sat upon the throne of Mark the
Evangelist twelve years, and he died in peace.
And on this day also died Barronyos of Banyos.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

383

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 04
(March 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the General Council assembled in Daset, of the children of ‘Omar, because of
certain wicked men who were called “Friends of the Jews,” and who used to keep the
glorious Paschal feast with the Jews, on the fourteenth day of the month of Nesan, that is to
say the month of Miyazya, when it fell on the second, or third, or fourth, or fifth, or the
Eve of the Sabbath, or on the first, the Sabbath, each one of whom the bishop of Daset had
banned, but they would not return [to the true use]. And he sent letters to Democratius,
Archbishop of Rome, and to Serapion, Archbishop of the city of Antioch, and Demetrius,
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and to Symmachus, Archbishop of Jerusalem, and
told them of the error of these men. And the four archbishops sent to each of them a letter,
saying, “Do not keep the glorious Paschal feast on any day except the First Day of the
week, and only after the festival of the Jews.” And they excommunicated everyone who
transgressed this command, expelling him or cutting him off from communion. And
eighteen bishops assembled at this Council, and they brought the evildoers before them,
and read to them the letters of the archbishops. Some of them turned from their evil
counsel, and some of them remained in their error; these last were anathematized, and
excommunicated, and expelled. And it was ordered that the glorious Paschal feast should
be kept according to the instructions of the holy Apostles who said, “This day of the
Paschal feast shall be the First Day of the week, the day of the Resurrection of our Lord.”
He who will be a partaker with the Jews in their festival let him separate himself from the
Christians. And may God keep them from the error of Satan, and deliver them from his
snares, and from his wiles, through the prayers of those who have pleased God by their
works, our King John, and our Queen Sabla Wangel, forever.
And on this day also Hanulyos (Hanulius), the governor, became a martyr in the city of
Bergya, which is on the borders of Pamphylia. This holy man, because of his love for our
lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory, held his authority, whilst Bernyakos ruled for
Diocletian. And when Hanulyos (Hanulius) stood before Diocletian, he proclaimed boldly
the Faith of God in a loud, clear voice, and he sent (i.e. ascribed) to God, our Lord Jesus
Christ, to Whom be praise, many praises, and he cursed and anathematized the polluted
idols. And the governor ordered his men to crucify him upon a tree, and they did so, and
the holy man praised our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory, who had deemed him
worthy to become a martyr for His holy Name’s sake. Then he delivered up his soul into
the hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory!
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

384

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 05
(March 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Sarapamon, the strenuous ascetic and abbot of the
monastery of Saint Abba John, of the desert of Scete. This holy man became a monk in
the church of Saint Abba John in his youth, and he dwelt there and ministered to the holy
elders, and fought a good and strenuous fight for thirty-two years; then he was appointed
abbot of the monastery of Saint Abba John. And he added to his works of righteousness,
and to his ascetic labors, and he fasted and prayed and kept vigil continually, from the time
he became a monk until he died. When he had held the office of chief priest for twenty
years, he shut himself up in the church, and up to the day of his death never saw a man
again. He died fifteen years after, and during these fifteen years he never ate nor drank,
except at the beginning of the Sabbath, and on the First Day of the week. When the time
of his death drew nigh, the angel of God appeared unto him in the desert, and gave him a
cross of fire and said unto him, “Take this cross in thy hand.” And the holy man said unto
him, “How can I hold fire in my hand?” And the angel answered and said unto him, “Fear
not, for our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory, hath not given unto fire dominion over
thee”; and he stretched out his holy hand and took the cross from the hand of the angel.
And the angel said unto him, “Be strong, and received the Holy Mysteries; at the end of the
third day I shall come and take thee.” And when he woke up from his sleep, he told the
holy elders what he had seen, and they embraced him, and wept, and entreated him to
remember them; and on his part he entreated them to remember him always at the time of
their prayers. Then he received the Holy Mysteries and died in peace on the third day.
And the holy elders who dwelt near him swathed him for burial, as was fitting, with the
singing of hymns, and funerary chants, and they buried him in the grave of the righteous.
And on this day also Saint Eudoxia became a martyr; now her name is interpreted “Peace
with good will.” This holy woman was a Samaritan, and she came from the city of
Ba’Albak, on the borders of Basri, in the neighborhood of Mount Lebanon, in the reign of
Trabyanos (Trajan, or, Tiberius), Emperor of Rome. Her father’s name was Yonas, and
her mother’s name was Tababet, and in her early life she lived by prostitution and
lewdness. And she used to beautify her face, and adorn her person with beautiful
ornaments, so that she might lead the multitude astray, and make them fall into sin with
her; and by such lewd life she acquired great riches. And a certain righteous monk, of the
men of Jerusalem, whose name was Germanus, heard the report of her, and he visited her,
disguised as one of those who were in the habit of visiting her. And when he had entered
he sat down with her in the house, and began to rebuke her with serious and terrifying
rebukes, and he reminded her of Gahanam, and of the worm that never sleepeth, and the
outer darkness, and of each of the fearful punishments, which are therein. And she
answered and said unto him, “Is there a resurrection of bodies after death? After they have
become dust, will they be punished?” And he said unto her, “Yes.” And she said unto
him, “What is the proof of this statement? It is not written in the Law, which God gave
unto Moses the prophet and to our fathers, and they did not believe.” And he revealed unto
her what is written in the Old and New Testaments concerning the resurrection of the dead,
on the day of Judgment, and concerning the punishment of sinners, and concerning the joy
of the righteous. And his words and his rebuke entered her heart, and she believed that
385

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
bodies will be raised up on the day of Judgment. And she said unto him, “If I turn from
my prostitution will God accept me?” And Saint Germanus answered and said unto her,
“If thou wilt believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise, and believe that He
came into the world, and took away the sins of men by His crucifixion for their sakes, and
if thou wilt repent with sincere repentance from this moment, and wilt be baptized with
Christian baptism, God will accept thee, and will not remember any of the sins which thou
hast committed. Nay, thou wilt become as thou wast on the day when thou wast born from
thy mother’s womb, and there will be opened unto thee the True Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to Whom be praise!” And she asked him to baptize her with Christian baptism, and
he took her and brought her to the Bishop of Ba’Albak. And she confessed before him the
Holy Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Word of God, and His Crucifixion and
Resurrection. And the bishop stood up and prayed over the water, so that he might baptize
her with Christian baptism, and God opened the eyes of her heart, and she saw a shining
angel leading her to the water, and other angels rejoicing and exulting for her sake. And
she saw also faces, which terrified her, and a black and horrible being who tried to drag her
from them, and he was wroth with her. When she saw this sight the desire for Christian
baptism increased in her, and she repented, and straightway she was baptized with
Christian baptism. And she gave all the riches, which she had collected by her sinful trade
to the poor and needy, and she entered one of the houses of virgins, and she put on the garb
of the nun, and fought a good and perfect fight. And Satan entered into the heart of one of
the men who used to commit fornication with her, and he made an accusation against her
to the governor, who commanded that his men should bring her before him. And when she
came she stood at the door of the hall, and she found in his house great lamentation and
weeping, for the governor’s son, who was dead. And she came into the house, and prayed,
and entreated our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise! And He raised up the son of the
governor from death. When the governor saw this miracle he marveled exceedingly, and
he believed on our Lord Jesus Christ through her, with a firm belief. After this another
governor, whose name was Diogenes, was appointed in his stead; and he heard the story of
this virgin, and had her brought before him, and she saw standing before him a certain
young man, who was blind of an eye, and she made prayer and supplication over him, and
she made the sign of the Cross over the eye that was blind, and it was opened forthwith,
and the young man saw clearly with it; and the governor sent the holy woman away. After
this another governor, whose name was Bakinikos, was appointed in the place of
Diogenes. And he heard that story of the holy woman Eudoxia, and had her brought to
him so that he might torture her. And she besought our Lord Jesus Christ to give her a
portion with the martyrs, and the Lord received her petition. And the governor
commanded his men to cut off her head, and they cut it off with the sword; and she
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
Salutation to Gabra Manfas Kedus Rabbuni who subdued lions, and made wild beasts his servants.
And on this day also died Abuna Theodore, Abbot of Dabra Libanos; he was the fifth of those who
sat upon the throne of Abuna Takla Haymanot. This father was from his youth up a habitation of
the Holy Ghost, and he was a follower of the Law of the holy fathers who were before him, and it
was therefore most fitting for him to sit upon the throne of Abuna Takla Haymanot. He brought his
days to a close with strenuous devotion to fasting and prayer, and he fulfilled all the ordinances of
purity even like the angels. And he passed from the labor of this world to the rest, which is forever.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

386

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 06
(March 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Dioscoros became a martyr in the days of the reign of the successors of
Muhammad the prophet. This holy man was a native of Alexandria, and certain men made
him leave the Christian Faith of his fathers, and brought him into the Faith of the Muslims,
and he remained in their belief for a few days. Now he had a sister in the Feyum, who was
married to a certain believer, and when she heard that her brother had abandoned the Faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ she was exceedingly sad. And she sent him a letter, saying, “I
would rather that news had come to me telling me that thou hadst died a Christian, nay, I
would have rejoiced therein, than that this news of thee which hath reached me, telling me
that thou art not dead, and that thou hast abandoned the Faith of Christ, thy God.” And she
added many other words of rebuke in that letter, and at the end thereof she said, “Know
thou that this letter [marks] the ending of the love which was between thee and me. From
this time onwards I will never look upon thy face. Send me no more of thy letters.” When
he had red his sister’s letter, he wept bitterly, and he smote his face and tore his beard.
Then he rose up forthwith and girded up his loins, and prayed a long prayer, and entreated
God with many entreaties, and he made the sign of the life giving Cross-over himself, and
went out from his house and wandered about in the city of Alexandria. And when the
Muslims saw him they seized him and brought him to the governor, who asked him what
had happened to him; and Dioscoros said unto him, “I am a Christian, and I know nothing
except this.” And the governor answered and said unto him, “Didst thou not abandon the
Christian religion, and adopt ours?” And Saint Dioscoros answered and said unto him, “It
is written in the Holy Gospel, ‘He who doth not believe in the Son shall not see life, but the
punishment of God shall descend upon him.’ For this reason I believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Living God. I was born a Christian, I will die a Christian.” And the
governor was wroth with him, and said unto him, “If thou dost not turn from this counsel
of thine, I will torture thee very severely”; but Dioscoros was not afraid of the governor’s
tortures, and he did not turn from his good counsel. And the governor beat him for a long
time, and inflicted great pain upon him, and then shut him up in prison, where he remained
for a few days. After this the governor had him brought out of the prison house, and
promised him, swearing many oaths as he did so, that he would give him much money if
he would turn from his counsel to the Muhammadan Faith, and that if he did not, he would
burn him in the fire. And Dioscoros said, “I will not died outside the life-giving Christian
Faith”; and the governor commanded that they should burn him. And his men dug a large
pit outside the city, and they filled it with wood, and they set fire to the wood, and the
flames of the fire mounted up to a great height. And the men of the city beat him sorely
and they gashed his body with butchers’ knives. Afterwards they cast him into that fiery
pit, and he delivered his soul into the hand of God and received the crown of martyrdom in
the kingdom of heaven.
And on this day also is commemorated the death of Saint Theodosius the Confessor,
Bishop of Corinth, and a native of Cyprus. Julius, governor of the island of Cyprus, who
had been appointed by Diocletian, heard the report of this holy man, and he had him
brought before him, and demanded from him that he should deny our Lord Jesus Christ,
and that he should cast incense to his filthy idols. And Saint Theodosius answered and
387

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
said unto him, “I believe on my Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, Whom I
worship.” And when Saint Theodosius would not obey his command, he flogged him
severely and lashed him painfully with whips made of buffalo hide; then he crucified him,
and made gashes in all his body. And afterwards the governor made him lie upon an iron
bed, which had been made red-hot; but none of these tortures affected him in any way
whatsoever. Then they tied to his legs long iron bands, and dragged him to the prison
house, and cast him into it, and he remained in the prison house until God blotted out
Diocletian the unbeliever. And [when] Constantine the righteous emperor reigned, he
commanded and he released all those who had been shut up in the prison for the Faith’s
sake. When they had set free this holy man, he returned to his country, and he filled his
office, and tended his flock well; and he died in peace.
And on this day also died the dwellers in the desert, Anthony, and Arkaladius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 07
(March 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Philemon and Ablanius (Apollonius) became martyrs. This holy man
Philemon was the jester and singer of Arianus, the governor of Antinoe, and Ablanius
(Apollonius) was his musician; and the jester and the musician were friends and they
wished to become martyrs. And Philemon the musician took the apparel, which was his
and gave it to Ablanius (Apollonius), and he put on the apparel of Ablanius (Apollonius),
and went to the governor, and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before him. And the
governor commanded his servants to shoot many arrows at him, and they did so. And after
that Ablanius (Apollonius) came to the governor, and with him there was a singer who
sang, and he confessed before him the Lord Jesus Christ. And the governor was wroth
because of this thing, and he looked at him, and knew that he was Ablanius (Apollonius)
the musician, and he was sad because of Philemon, for he had shot him with arrows and he
was dead; and he commanded them to shoot arrows at Ablanius (Apollonius), and they did
so. And it came to pass that whilst they were shooting at Ablanius (Apollonius), one of the
arrows glanced back, and smote the governor in the eye, and destroyed it. Thus the holy
men Philemon and Ablanius (Apollonius) ended their striving and received the crown of
life.
And on this day also died the Emperor Theodosius.
And on this day also Saint Theodotus became a martyr. This holy man came from the
district of Galatia. And he grew up in the fear of God, and practiced asceticism, and
information was laid against him before the governor, and men reported to him that
Theodotus was a Christian; and the governor commanded them to bring him bound before
him. And when Theodotus heard [about this order], he came to the governor without
making it necessary for them to seize him, and he uttered imprecations upon the governor
and upon his idols; and the governor swore, and showed him [his] instruments of torture,
and [tried to] force him to offer up sacrifice to the gods. And when the governor saw the
388

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
firmness of his courage, he ordered his soldiers to crucify him, and to scrape the sides of
his body until the organs, which were therein, became visible; and as he did not die they
took him into the prison house. And they brought him out again, and hung him upon a
cross, and they made new wounds in him, and scraped his sides, but the holy man
accounted the tortures of the governor as nothing, because his heart was transfixed by the
love of God, and his eyes saw the things which were in the heavens above. And when the
governor saw the nature of his heart, he ordered his soldiers to cut off the head of the holy
man with the sword. And when Saint Theodotus heard of the crowning of his martyrdom,
he went forth rejoicing. And he prayed to God, and made petition and entreaty unto Him,
saying, “I thank Thee, O my Lord Jesus Christ, for delivering me from all the evil, which
hath followed me, and for casting down into Gahanam those who have risen up against me,
and for raising me up from the gates of death.” And when Saint Theodotus had knelt
down, the executioner brought a bandage to cover his eyes, but Saint Theodotus said, “A
bandage of this kind is for those who fear death, but I, through the Name of my Lord Jesus
Christ, do not fear death.” And the executioner drew his sword and cut off his head.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 08
(March 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Arianus, the governor of Antinoe, became a martyr. Now, after the holy
men Philemon and Ablanius (Apollonius) had become martyrs, one of the believers said
unto the governor, “If thou wilt take some of the blood of those saints, and wilt smear thine
eye therewith, thou wilt receive thy sight”; and the governor took some of their blood, and
smeared his eye therewith, and he was able to see straightway. And Arianus sorrowed,
with a very great sorrow, because of the evil things which he had done to the holy martyrs,
and because he had tortured them with great severity and unmercifully. And he rose up
straightway, and smashed his idols, and believed in our Lord Jesus Christ, and forsook the
torturing of those who believed in Christ. When Diocletian heard the report of Arianus,
and of how he had behaved, he sent his soldiers and had him brought to him, and he asked
him why he had forsaken the worship of his gods. And Arianus began to tell him about the
signs and wonders which God was working by the hands of the holy martyrs, and how, in
spite of the tortures which he had inflicted upon them, and the cutting of their limbs, they
rose up again with all their natural strength and health unimpaired. And Diocletian was
furious with him, because of what he said, and he commanded his soldiers to torture him,
and they tortured him severely. Then he commanded them to cast him into a dungeon, and
to lock the door upon him until he died; and they did as he had commanded. And our Lord
Jesus Christ sent an angel to him and he brought him out from that dungeon, and made him
to stand by the bed of the Emperor Diocletian. And the emperor woke up from his sleep,
and when he saw him he was afraid, and said unto him, “Who art thou?” And Arianus said
unto him, “I am Arianus, the governor of Antinoe.” And the emperor was terrified because
of him, and he commanded his soldiers to thrust him into a hair sack, and to cast him into
the sea; and this they also did unto him, and Arianus delivered up his soul into the hand of
the Lord whilst he was in the hair sack. And when Arianus was embracing his kinsfolk
389

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and his slaves, he said unto them, “The Lord hath informed me in a vision of the night that
He will heal my body, and restore it to the city of Antinoe.” And he said unto them,
“Await ye my body at the port of the city of Alexandria.” And when the soldiers of
Diocletian had cast his body into the sea, God commanded a certain whale, and he carried
the saint and brought him to the port of the city of Alexandria, and laid him down on the
dry beach. And the slaves of Arianus were there awaiting him, and they took his body, and
brought it to his city Antinoe, and they laid it with the bodies of the holy martyrs Philemon
and Ablanius (Apollonius). Thus Arianus finished his good fight, and received the rest of
heaven.
Salutation to the four Galatians who perished with Arianus.
And on this day also Matthias the Apostle, one of the Twelve Apostles, who was appointed
in the place of Judas Iscariot, became a martyr, having preached in the cities to which he
had gone, and converted the people thereof to the knowledge of God. Before this he went
to a city of the cannibals, whose food consisted of the bodies of the travelers who went to
sojourn among them. Now the custom of these men was as follows: Whenever they
seized a traveler, they used to put out his eyes, and then place him in the prison house,
writing down on paper the day on which they had seized him. And they fed him in prison
on grass until thirty days were fulfilled, and then they would bring him out and eat him.
When Matthias the Apostle came unto them, and preached among them, they seized him
and treated him in this manner, and they put out his eyes, and shut him up in prison.
Before thirty days had passed over him in the prison house, God sent unto him Andrew the
Apostle, and his disciple with him, and they came unto Mathias in the prison house, and
they saw the abominable thing, which the men of the city did to the men who were shut up
in the prison house. And the men of the city knew that the apostles had come into their
city, and they wanted to seize them and to kill them; now it was Satan who worked upon
the men of the city to make them kill the apostles. And the apostles made entreaty to God,
and He made a stream of water to flow forth from under a pillar, which was in the prison
house, and the water flowed out into the city, and rose up until it reached the necks of the
people. And the people being in sore tribulation, and having given up all hopes of saving
their lives, came to the holy apostles, and wept before them and confessed their sins. And
the holy apostles said unto them, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and ye shall be saved”;
and all the people believed. And the apostles admonished them, and taught them the
mystery of the knowledge of the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the holy
apostles prayed to God, Who made the water to cease through their prayers, and then they
baptized them in the Name of the Holy Trinity. And they entreated our Lord Jesus Christ
to remove from them the disposition of wild beasts, and He did so, and they became mild
and gentle folk and ate the food which men are wont to eat. And the apostles appointed
over them bishops and priests, and they tarried with them for a space of thirty days, during
which they instructed them, and confirmed them in the Right Faith, and then they departed
from them, and the people entreated the apostles to come back to them speedily. Now
Saint Matthias the Apostle went to the city of Damascus and preached therein in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the men thereof took him, and laid him upon an iron bed,
and they lighted a fire there under and kept it burning for seven days and seven nights.
And when they came to him to look upon him, they found his face shining with a great
light, like the light of the sun; and the fire had not touched him at all, and his body and the
hair of his head, and his apparel, had not in any way suffered. Then they took deep
counsel together, and they lighted a fire and kept it burning under the iron bed whereon the
390

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
holy man was lying until fourteen days had passed by. After this [time] they brought him
out from the fire, and they found him sound, and whole, and uninjured; and they marveled
exceedingly, and they all believed on our Lord Jesus Christ through Matthias the Apostle,
who baptized them in the Name of the Holy Trinity. And he appointed priests over them,
and he tarried many days with them, confirming them in the Right Faith. After this he died
a happy death in one of the cities of the Jews, the name of which was Pilawon, and they
laid his holy body therein; and very many signs and great wonders took place through it,
and he healed those who were sick.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Julianus, Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria; now he was the fourteenth of the number of the archbishops. This holy man
was a priest in the city of Alexandria, and he was so learned and wise that during his days
there could not be found his like in the land of Egypt; and by the Will of God, he was
appointed archbishop. And during the days of his office he composed Homilies and many
admonitory Discourses, and he taught the people continually, and admonished them, and
confirmed them in the Right Faith. And he dwelt in peace and safety during the days of his
office, and all the days of his occupation of the throne of Mark the Evangelist were
fourteen years, and he died in peace.
Salutation to the Seven Sleepers who, in order to escape from the service of dumb idols,
betook themselves to a cave, where sleep overtook them; they are commemorated on this
day.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 09
(March 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became martyrs Andrianus and his wife, and Eusebius and ‘Arma, and forty
martyrs who suffered very severe tortures in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom
be praise ! and who refused to worship idols of gold and silver. They said, “We worship
the God of heaven and of earth, our Lord Jesus Christ.” Afterwards they cut off their
heads with the sword, and they received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of
heaven.
And on this day are commemorated the twenty hundred martyrs who [suffered] with Abba
Nob.
And on this day also died the holy father and ascetic Kueten (Cythinus). This holy man
came from a district the name of which was Bantanyos, in the country of Syria. His
parents worshipped the stars; his father’s name was Nestor and his mother’s name was
Theodora, and he was [born] in the days when the Apostles were preaching in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. When this holy man arrived at man’s estate, there appeared in him
many virtues, purity, righteousness, and gentleness (or, humility), and he was exceedingly
compassionate; and he was skilled in every branch of learning. His parents wished to make
him marry a wife, but he did not desire to do so. And they settled him in a house and
391

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
married him to a wife against his will, but he refused to consort with her, not because of
the law of righteousness, and not because of weakness of body, but because he hated the
lust of the flesh; and he dwelt with his wife many days but preserved his virginity. And he
multiplied his prayers, and he petitioned God therein, and made many supplications,
saying, “O God, have mercy upon me in Thy knowledge.” And the angel of the Lord
appeared unto him as he did unto Cornelius, and he taught him the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and he commanded him to go to one of the apostles, and to be baptized by him.
And he went and was baptized with Christian baptism, and he learned all the Law of the
Christian Faith, and he received the Divine Mystery. He heard continually the teaching of
the holy Apostle Paul, and he acquired from him purity, and the working of righteousness,
and devotion to God’s service, and humility, and the habit of praying continually, and
fasting, and prostration, and vigil; and God gave him the power to work signs and
wonders, and he had dominion over Satans. And he persuaded his parents, and gave them
instruction, and brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and also his wife, and
her parents and kinsfolk. When one of the unbelievers came into the house of idols to
offer sacrifice to Satan, Kueten (Cythinus), the holy man, knew him, and he cried out
against Satan, and he rebuked him, and commanded him to confess before the people, and
to tell them who he was. And when the holy man forced him, that devil confessed before
the people that he was Satan, and was not a god. And all the people who were there cried
out, saying, “One is the God of Saint Kueten (Cythinus),” and they believed and were
baptized with Christian baptism. And when the governor, who had been appointed by
Claudius Caesar, heard the report of this holy man, he sent and had him brought before
him, and the holy man confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before him. And the governor
commanded his soldiers to bind him, and to beat him very severely, and they did so. When
the man of the city heard that the soldiers were torturing Saint Kueten (Cythinus), they ran,
and they all came to him, and wanted to kill the governor, because of their love for Saint
Kueten (Cythinus). And the governor fled from them, and they released the holy man from
his fetters, and they washed the blood off him, and carried him to his house. And he lived
for many years, and pleased God Whom he loved exceedingly, and he died in peace. After
his death the believers dedicated a church to his name, and they carried his holy body into
it, and God exhibited many signs and wonders through it.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 10
(March 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the glorious Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ - to Whom be praise - appeared
twice; the first time through the Empress Helena, the mother of Constantine, the righteous
emperor. For on this day, the blessed Helena, the blessed of the Lord--her son Constantine
having entered the Christian Faith--went to Jerusalem, and discovered the wood of the holy
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; and many churches, and the holy churches which were in
Jerusalem, were built by her. When her son Constantine believed in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and was baptized with Christian baptism, the holy woman Helena went to the city of
Jerusalem (and with her there was a large company of soldiers) and sought for the
392

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Honorable Cross. When she found that there was no one who would tell her the place
thereof, she took an old man, a Jew, and put him under the tribulation of hunger and thirst.
And when he had suffered great tribulation through hunger and thirst, he spoke unto
Helena, saying, “Clear out the site of Golgotha.” And Helena commanded the Jews, and
they cleared out the site of Golgotha. Now the Jews had taken counsel together, and had
issued a decree that all the offal and filth, which each man cast forth from his house,
should be thrown out on Golgotha, on the tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Nazarene - to
Whom be praise! And the Jews continued to heap offal on Golgotha in this wise for a
period of two hundred years and more, and until the Empress Helena came to Jerusalem;
and the offal, which had been cast out there, made a very great heap. And when the Jews
had cleared it away, according as the empress had commanded them, there appeared in the
midst of them three crosses. And because they did not know which of the three crosses
was the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, they brought a dead man, and they laid upon him
first one cross and then the second, but he did not rise up; and when they laid the third
cross upon him he rose up immediately. And Helena then knew that that cross was the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and she and all the believing people bowed down before it.
And it is written in another book that she sent that Cross to her son, that which remained
was the base wherein the Cross was fixed, and she sent one half of that to her son, together
with the nails. And she built churches, [and] holy shrines, the decorations and structures of
which are described in the section for the seventeenth day of the month of Meskaerem.
And it came to pass in the days of Heraclius, Emperor of Rome, when the Persians reigned
in Egypt, and when the men of Persia wished to return to their country, that one of their
officers passed over [into Syria], and arrived in the city of Jerusalem, and he went into the
church of the Honorable Cross. And he saw in it a great light, which shone before the base
(or column) wherein the Honorable Cross, and said unto him, “No one is able to hold this
except a Christian.” And he took two deacons and commanded them to take the wood of
the Cross, and to become the guardians thereof; and they laid it in a chest, and did with it
according as the officer had commanded them. And he took the wood of the Honorable
Cross, and he made captive very many of the men of the city of Jerusalem, and he returned
to his own country. When the Emperor of Rome heard that Persians had raided the city of
Jerusalem, and had carried away into captivity many men from it, and had taken away the
wood of the Honorable Cross, he was exceedingly sorrowful because of these things. And
the King of Persia returned, and fought with him, and he slew very many of their men, and
he went round about through all the city searching for the wood of the Honorable Cross,
and he found it not. Now the officer who had taken it away had brought the two deacons to
a certain place, which was nigh unto his house, and he gave them orders, and they dug a
very deep hole in the ground, and buried the wood of the Honorable Cross therein, and
then he slew the two deacons. And it came to pass that a certain maiden of the children of
the priesthood whom that officer had carried away captive, and who lived in his house, was
looking out of the window of his house at the moment when he slew the two deacons, and
buried the wood of the Honorable Cross [in the hole]. And that maiden went and told
Heraclius, the Emperor of Rome, what the officer had done, and how he had slain the two
deacons, and had buried the wood of the Honorable Cross. When the emperor heard this he
rejoiced exceedingly. And that maiden guided the emperor, with whom were some of his
soldiers, and bishops, and priests, and they followed her until she brought them to the
place. And they dug there and found the wood of the Honorable Cross, and they lifted it
up out of the pit, and the emperor, in his imperial apparel, and all the people who were
with him, bowed down before the wood of the Honorable Cross, and he rejoiced with
393

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
exceedingly great joy. And the appearance of and the finding of the wood of the
Honorable Cross a second time, took place on the tenth day of the month of Magabit.
Then the emperor took the wood of the Honorable Cross with him to the city of
Constantinople.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 11
(March 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Tewokanitos became a martyr, in the days of the Emperor Maximianus.
This Tewokanitos was an officer in the army, and he cast away his belt; and with him was
the blessed woman Alexandra, and they believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be
praise! When Maximianus heard this, he was wroth, and he commanded his soldiers to
strip off the apparel of the saint, and to dress him in the clothes of women, and to place
him among the women who wove garments. After this he ordered them to roll a red-hot
wheel over him, and to crucify him, head downwards. And they also brought a bowl
which was full of boiling pitch, and they set it upon his head, so that the pitch ran down
into his ears; then they took him down from the cross, and set him before the Emperor
Maximianus, with Alexandra who had been imprisoned with him. And the emperor
commanded them to cut out the tongue of Tewokanitos, and to tie a huge stone to the
necks of the saints, and to cast them into the River Euphrates. And they ended their
martyrdom, and the brethren found their bodies on the river bank, and they buried them.
On this day also Basilaos (Basil) the bishop became a martyr, Abba ‘Armon, Archbishop
of the city of Jerusalem, appointed this holy man (as well as others) to be a bishop, not
over any one particular city, but he sent him to preach in the cities of the ‘Aramawiyan (i.e.
pagans) who possessed neither religion nor faith. And this holy man Basilaos (Basil) went
to a city of the infidels, unto whom he preached the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
they beat him and drove him out of every one of their cities. When he came into the cities
of the civilized peoples, and preached in them the preaching of the Holy Gospel, half of the
people believed on the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the other half of the people who
believed nothing drove him away. And he went forth outside the city and lived there in a
cave, and he made supplication to God continually for the men of that city, and prayed that
they might come into the knowledge of God, and believe on His Only Son. At that time
the son of the governor of that city died, (now he was his only son,) and his father
sorrowed for him with a very great sorrow. And the governor saw his son in a dream
standing before him, and he said unto him, “O my father, call Saint Basilaos (Basil) the
bishop, and ask him to pray to our Lord Jesus Christ on my behalf. And behold I am
[living] in great darkness.” When the governor woke from his dream, he rose up, and was
frightened, and he took with him the elders of the city and went to the cave of Saint
Basilaos (Basil); and he asked him to come with him into the city and to pray for his son.
And the holy man accepted his petition, and came into the city, and he prayed over the
grave of the son of the governor, and he rose up forthwith alive, before them all. And the
governor believed on God, our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise! And all the men
394

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
who belonged to him, and very many of the men of the city also, were baptized with
Christian baptism by Saint Basilaos (Basil). Now there were in that city very many
congregations of Jews, and they were envious of Saint Basilaos (Basil), and they joined
with the men of the city who did not believe on our Lord Jesus Christ, and they caused the
holy man to come to them. And they rose up against him all together, and they beat him
very severely, and they dragged him through the city until he yielded up his soul into the
hand of God.
And on this day also died Abba ‘Alef, one of the Nine Saints. [Wanting in the Bodleian
MS.]
And on this day also are commemorated the martyrs Ausanius, and Ephraim, and
Arcadius, and Elias.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 12
(March 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day God sent Michael unto Balaam the magician, when he was called by Balak to
curse Israel. He stood before him on the road and frightened him, and at length his ass
spoke with human speech, and God turned his cursing into blessing.
And on this day also took place the manifestation of the virginity of the glorious Saint
Demetrius, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria; now he was of the number of the fathers
who became archbishops the twelfth. And the cause of the manifestation was Saint
Julianus, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, his predecessor. On the night wherein he
was to die, on that same night the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him,
“Thou art going to our Lord Jesus Christ, and he who shall come unto thee on the morrow,
having with him a bunch of grapes, is the man whom it is fitting to be made archbishop
after thee.” And when the morrow had come, this holy and honorable man Demetrius
came to Saint Julianus, the Archbishop, and with him was a bunch of grapes. And Saint
Julianus began to say unto the people, “Behold this man is he who shall be your archbishop
after me,” and he told them how the angel of God had spoken concerning him; and when
Saint Julianus was dead they took Demetrius and appointed him archbishop. Now
Demetrius had married a wife, and no man who has ever been appointed Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria has ever married a wife, except this holy man. And Satan entered into
the hearts of the people of the congregation, and they talked against the holy man and
abused him because of his wife. And the angel of God appeared unto Saint Demetrius and
said unto him, “Inasmuch as some of the people are reviling thee, it is meet for thee to
remove doubt from their hearts, and thou must reveal unto them thy strife with thy wife.
This matter is hateful.” And the angel said unto him, “It is not meet that thou shouldst
save thy self and destroy others for thy sake; but if thou wert a good shepherd thou wouldst
fight to save thy people.” And when the morrow of that twelfth day of Magabit had come,
Saint Demerius consecrated the Offering, and he commanded the people, saying, “Go ye
not forth from the church, but tarry here a little on my account.” Then he ordered them to
395

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
light a fire in the church, and he sent a messenger into the place of the women, and had his
wife brought out; and the congregation wondered at his action, because they did not know
what he was going to do. Then the holy man rose up, and prayed, and walked into the
blazing fire and stood up in it. And he took fire in his hand, placed it in his fillet, and he
prayed again a long time as he was burned by the fire; now the fire lay in his fillet, which
was unconsumed. Then he called his wife, and threw some of the fire into her garment,
and again he prayed for a long time, and the apparel of both of them was not burned in any
part. And the congregation marveled and gave praise to God, and asked Saint Demetrius
the Archbishop to tell them why he had done this thing. And he told them of his strife with
his wife, and how his father had compelled him to marry against his will, and how his wife
herself had had no wish to marry. [And he said] “Behold, we have lived together for eight
and forty years, and never once have we had union. We sleep in one bed, and the same
covering covereth both of us, and I have never known her as men know women for one
day. And during all this space of days the angel of the Lord hath come down from heaven
each night and hath covered us over with his wings. I have not revealed this matter to any
man whatsoever during all this space of days, and I never wished to reveal it at all, but it is
God Who hath commanded me to do this in order that ye may be saved from error.” And
the congregation marveled exceedingly at what they had seen and heard, and glorified
God; and they besought the holy man to forgive them their sins, and their abuse. And the
saint forgave them their error, and said unto them, “This hath not happened through you,
but through Satan, the hater of every good thing.” Then he blessed them and sent them
away to their houses, in peace, and they praised God and thanked Him that they had seen
some of the wonders of this Saint Demetrius the Archbishop.
And on this day also Saint Malazi, of the city of Felte’em, became a martyr.
Salutation to Joseph, who was renewed in his belly.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 13
(March 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day forty soldiers, who were holy men, became martyrs in the city of Sebastia.
These holy men became martyrs in the days of Alfayanos (Elianus) the king, who was one
of the governors of the Emperor Constantine. The emperor appointed him governor over
one of the countries [tributary] to Rom, and he commanded him to protect the Christians,
and to treat them with respect, and to love them. When Alfayanos (Elianus) came to that
country the people found that he worshipped idols, and he commanded all the people to
worship idols; but they rose up and cursed him and his idols. And that night forty soldiers
made an agreement among themselves to go to that governor, and to receive the crown of
martyrdom at his hands. When they were sleeping the angel of the Lord appeared unto
them in a vision and gave strength and fortitude to their souls. In the morning they rose up
and confessed their faith in our Lord Jesus Christ before their commander Agricolaus, and
he was wroth with them and threatened them, and they were afraid of him. And he
396

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
commanded his men to stone them, but the stones came back upon those who stoned
them. And there was near them a lake of water which was covered with ice, and near this
was a bath. And the governor commanded his men to throw them into this lake of ice, and
they threw them in, and their limbs were split open by the excessive cold. And one of
them was afraid of it, and he went forth from the lake and entered the bath house, but he
died quickly, and lost his reward, and did not find what he wished for. And one of the
warders saw forty crowns descend from heaven and of them nine and thirty rested on the
head of the nine and thirty holy martyrs; and one crown remained suspended in the hand of
the angel. Then straightway one of the soldiers who were stationed there rose up, and he
stripped off his apparel, and went down into the lake with the holy men, and he died and
received the crown which was suspended [in the hand of] the angel. And the holy men
remained in the lake, and some of them were young, and their handmaidens were
encouraging them and urging them to suffer patiently. And the holy men remained in the
lake for a very long time, but they did not die; and they did not wish to break their legs in
order that they might not die quickly. And God received their souls, and the soldiers were
not able to break their legs. After this the governor commanded his men to burn their
bodies with fire, and to carry them away on wagons, and cast them into the sea. As they
were carrying them away upon wagons, they found that one of them, a young man, was not
dead, and they did not put him on a wagon. And his mother took him, and tried to throw
him on the wagon with the holy martyrs, but the warders stopped her, because he was
alive, and he died on her bosom, and she cast him on to the wagon, with the holy men, and
they took him out to the city of Sebastia; and they cast them into the fire, and burnt them,
and then they threw them into the river. On the third day those holy martyrs appeared unto
the bishop of the city of Sebastia, and they said unto him, “Go to the river and there thou
wilt find our bodies; carry them away. Go there with the priests, and deacons, and the
people, and bring back our bodies, and bury them in a beautiful tomb.” And the bishop,
and the priests who were with him, set out by night, and they went to the river, and they
found the bodies of the holy martyrs gathered together in one place like bright stars, and
there was no portion of their bodies destroyed; and they took them and laid them in a
beautiful shrine. And the history of these martyrs was heard in the ends of the earth, and
the people celebrated their commemoration, and built churches in their honor in all the
ends of the earth, and very many signs and wonders took place through them.
And on this day also Orthodox folk celebrated the festival of the commemoration of the
persecution of Abba Macarius the Great, and of Macarius the Alexandrian.
When Valentinus ruled over the Empire of Rom, after Valeno his brother, he afflicted and
persecuted the orthodox believing people, because he believed in the abominable Faith of
Mani, and in the Faith of Arius, the evil one, and he appointed Lucius, the Arian,
Archbishop of Alexandria, and drove the Apostolic Athanasius into exile. This wicked
man Lucius sought out Father Macarius the Great, and Father Macarius the Alexandrian,
by the command of Waltes, the king, and had them brought from the desert. When they
came into his presence he spoke unto them with seductive words and with blandishment
and flattery and wished them to enter with him the Faith of Arius; but they would not turn
from their Faith at his words, and they were not afraid of him. And they rebuked him, and
argued with him gently and patiently, and they made him to see from the Holy Scriptures
the rottenness of the Faith of Arius, and the wickedness of his words. And straightway he
banished them to a remote island between Rome and Constantinople. And they made
ready an Alexandrian ship and soldiers, and they set guards over them, who bound them
397

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
with fetters of iron, and treated them cruelly in every possible manner. When they arrived
at the island, the guards set them before the king of the island, who was an evil man, and a
servant of Satan; moreover, he had corrupted the men of the island by his sorcery, until at
length they worshipped him, and made him a god; and they used to bow down and worship
him. When the king saw the fathers, he [tried to] compel them to worship him, but they
would not yield to his command. Nay, they entreated him to turn from his error. But he
would not turn at their words, and he shut them up, and put them in prison, and inflicted
many severe punishments and tortures upon them, and he afflicted them most grievously.
And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto them, and encouraged them, and gave them
strength to endure patiently. And when God willed that their virtues should become
manifest, Satan seized the daughter of the king, and tortured her with so many tortures that
her father and her mother sorrowed greatly. Now there were in the city many Satans, who
manifested themselves boldly, and who cried out and said, “What have we to do with thee,
O Marcarius, and thy companion whom they have exiled from their country?” And the
Satan who had authority over the daughter of the king cried out, saying, “If Macarius and
his companion do not come hither, I will not go out of the king’s daughter.” When the
king and those who were gathered together about him heard this, they marveled; and they
brought Macarius and his companion before the king. And when they had come to him
[they manifested their power] over the unclean spirit which dwelt in the king’s daughter.
And the king enquired of them concerning their business, and they told him everything
which had happened unto them, and he entreated them on behalf of his daughter and asked
them to heal her. And they rebuked him and said unto him, “Seeing that thou art but a man
why dost thou make thyself a god? If it be thou who hast created the heavens and the
earth, it is meet that thou shouldst thyself save thy daughter.” And straightway they prayed
to our Lord Jesus Christ, and they cast out the devil from the king’s daughter, and as the
devil was leaving her, he cried out and reviled the king, and the people of that island, for
their works of iniquity. When the king and the multitudes saw this, they cried out and said,
“We believe in the God of these holy men, for we know that there is no other god save
theirs in heaven and earth”; and the holy fathers taught them the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And the people gathered together those who were sick and suffering into one place,
and the fathers prayed over them, and made over them the sign of the Cross, and healed
them; and they also gave relief to, and healed many men whom the devils had seized, and
they continued to do so for many days. After this they pulled down the temple in the city,
and purified the site thereof, and they built there a church, for the site was fair and
spacious. And the king commanded and the people brought there a countless quantity of
gold and silver, and silk vestments, and everything which was necessary for the furnishing
of the sanctuary of God. And our holy fathers commanded cunning workers in metal and
smelters to make twelve bowls, each of which weighed a letra, and to engrave on them a
portrait of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a portrait of our holy Lady Mary, the Virgin, and
portraits of the two great angels Michael and Gabriel. And they ordered them to make
twelve bases (or stands) for the twelve vessels, and twelve vessels, and twelve . . . , the
twenty-one crosses, each one of which [weighed] three letra. And they ordered them to
paint (or, engrave) three shrines (?), and everything which was ordered for the ark of the
testimony was complete, and all the vessels thereof; and the remainder of the money they
distributed among the poor and needy. And it came to pass that on the eleventh day of the
month of Ter, the day whereon our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized, [the holy men] ordered
the people of the city to go down to the sea-shore, and to gather themselves together there.
Now they had brought with them the holy oil, with which they had filled a vessel, when
398

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
they were exiled form Alexandria. This oil had been preserved from the days of the
Apostolic Athanasius, for Lucius the Arian had not found it. Thus God had preserved it all
those days, and it had remained there, and nothing had injured it; and this took place by the
command of the Holy Ghost. At the moment when Macarius made the sign of the Cross
with the holy oil over the place of baptism, the water bubbled, and became like that which
boiled by the heat of fire in a cooking pot. And Macarius poured olive oil and Myron oil
over the face of the water, and it became like shining stars, and there appeared from it light
like unto the light of the sun. When the king and the people assembled saw this they were
afraid. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared from out of heaven, and John the Baptist, and
the holy angels at the consecration of the water, and the people were baptized in the Name
of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. And straightway there rose up a beautiful
aroma which was sweeter than that of any perfume. When the saints saw this they fell
down upon their knees, and remained there. And Macarius made supplication to God as he
knelt upon his knees, and said, “My Lord, I beseech Thee to let Thy mercy find me, and to
allow the consecration of this tabernacle, and the vessels thereof, to be performed by Thy
Divine Hand.” And the Lord said unto him, “I consent.” And the Lord took the Myron oil
from the holy father, and He laid it in His right hand, and He consecrated the Tabernacle,
and the vessels thereof. And He said unto Father Macarius, “I command thee to consecrate
three ambulacra, and I am with thee. And thy companion Macarius shall serve with thee in
this holy service; the first ambulacrum, the middle one, shall bear the name of Mary, who
gave Me birth, the Virgin; that on the right shall bear the name of the Holy Cross; and that
which is on the left shall bear thy name, for thou hast shed thy blood for My Name’s sake,
through Lucius, the evil one, in this island.” And when the blessed men began to do as the
Lord commanded them, David and the angels sang, and sanctified with their words the
men of this island; and when the people heard the beautiful voices, they marveled and
praised God. And our Lord Christ also commanded Saint Macarius to carry the Offering
upon the Tabernacle, and to consecrate [it]. And Macarius said unto Him, “O my Lord,
command Peter, the chief of the Apostles, to consecrate this day, for on this day, for the
first time, the Offering is carried about, for Thy Name’s sake, in this island.” And our
Lord said unto him, “It is meet for thee [to do this]. It is thou who hast sown in this island,
and it is I Who give the increase. Hast thou not heard what I have said by the mouth of
Paul my disciple, He who soweth is he who shall eat his fruit early.” and when Father
Macarius began to consecrate there stood with him the holy fathers Peter on his right hand,
and Mark on his left, and all the Apostles surrounded them to help him, and Macarius the
Alexandrian was deacon. And Paul read the Book of Paul (i.e. the Epistle), and John read
the Apostle (sic) (i.e. the Gospel), and Luke read the Acts of the Apostles, and David read
the Psalms, and our Lord and God read the Gospel, for His memorial, which is to be
adored, and the Holy Spirit came down in the form of a white dove upon the bread and
wine; and they set forth the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise !
And when the holy man put his fingers round the cup, they became the color of blood.
And all the hosts of the cherubim spread out their wings over the Tabernacle, and Michael
and Gabriel and all the Apostles came to help them. And Father Macarius and Macarius
the Alexandrian became like each other in form, and they gave the Holy Mysteries to the
people. And after the Offering was administered, our Lord Christ took the form of Father
Macarius, and He sat down above the throne from which the Gospel was read, and His face
shone like the sun, and He gave the benediction to the people and returned into the
Tabernacle, and His disciples with Him. And again after seven days our father Macarius
prayed to the Lord and made mention concerning the establishing and the maintenance of
399

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the Church. And our Lord appeared unto him and said unto him, “Thou art he who art
worthy before Me of this great glory.” When the elder heard this he bowed low before the
Lord, and he wept bitterly, and said, “Remember, O Lord, what Thou didst say unto me: I
will take thee back to thy sons the monks of Dabra Sihat, and thou shalt see them before
thou goest forth from this body. And if I do not go back they will say, Macarius hath
forsaken the monastic life and hath become Patriarch.” And the Lord said unto him, “O
Macarius, I will fulfill for thee all the desire of thy heart; bring one of thy sons whom thou
wouldst choose to be Patriarch.” And the holy man said unto Him, “Thou, O Lord,
knowest hearts, look then at the aged metal-worker, for he is strong in the holy Faith, and
he hath never known intercourse with women.” And our Lord said unto him, “Let it be as
thou sayest; in truth he is a good man.” Then the saint called this metal-worker, and made
him a deacon; then he appointed him a priest, and after that he raised him grade by grade
until finally he attained the office of archbishop. And he named him John. And all the
heavenly host cried out three times, saying, “Worthy, worthy, worthy is John, the
Archbishop, the son of Macarius, the new sprout of Mark the evangelist”; and the king and
all the people heard these words. And our Lord opened the eyes of the mind of John the
Archbishop, and he gazed after our Lord Christ as long as he was able to see Him, and he
uttered many words. And he saw the sanctuary filled with the spiritual hosts, and the
prophets, and the holy apostles. And our Lord Christ called Abba Macarius the Great, and
Abba Macarius the Alexandrian, and He said unto them, "Blessed are ye, and blessed shall
be the men who shall remember you upon earth, and they shall inherit life everlasting.
And I swear unto you by Myself that whosoever shall suffer because of the toil which ye
have endured for My Name’s sake in this island, and shall see it and shall declare it in the
church as he praiseth Me, he who hath heard from his (?) father all good things, such shall
never lack anything. And I will deliver them from all their tribulations, and I will forgive
them their sins, and at the moment of their departure from this world I will send the angels
of mercy to take their souls to everlasting pleasure, and to My kingdom, which ye have
imagined. And in every religious house, or city, or church, or building of the Orthodox
wherein this story shall be proclaimed, I will dwell, and I will set My blessing, and My
peace therein, until the end of the world. Whosoever shall contradict this history it would
be better for him if he had never been born upon the earth. If they repent truly I will
forgive them. Verily I say unto you, as ye have confessed Me before men I will confess
you before My Father Who is in heaven, and before the holy angels.” And again He said
unto them, “The time hath come for you to return to your city”; and He gave them the
benediction, and went up into heaven. Then straightway the blessed fathers gathered
together all the people, with the king, and told them that they were going to return to their
own country, and they commanded them to keep all the Law of our Lord Christ, and to
honor John the Archbishop. And they committed to their charge many things, and
exhorted them to turn neither to the right hand nor to the left from the True Faith. When
the people heard them they were dismayed, and they wept bitterly, and the holy men wept
together with them; and they dismissed them in peace, and blessed each of them. And
straightway an angel of the cherubim came, and lifted them up, and carried them on his
wings, and in a single night brought them to Alexandria and let them descend into the city
before the gates of the monastery of Abba Timothy the Archbishop at dawn on the First
Day of the week. When Abba Timothy heard of this, he rejoiced with an exceedingly great
joy, and when he saw them again he wept with many tears, and bowed down to the
fathers. And they also bowed down before him, and they embraced each other, and they
conversed about what had happened to them, and they told him of the conversion of those
400

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
foreign peoples to the Lord, and of the wonders which had taken place. And the
archbishop marveled, and all the people who heard marveled, and they praised God; and
Macarius the Egyptian, and Macarius the Alexandrian, remained there eight days. And the
angel of the cherubim appeared again, and he carried them on his wings and brought them
to Dabra Sihat, and a cherub cried out in the air, saying, “O sons of Abba Macarius, behold
your father hath come back from exile, bearing the fruits of the Holy Ghost”; when the
monks heard this, they all went forth from their cells; now the monks were in number fifty
thousand. Among them was Abba John the “Short,” and Abba Besoy, and they embraced
his hands and his feet, and they wept bitterly when he told them all that had happened unto
him. Then they rejoiced because they saw his face again, and he rejoiced with them, and
blessed them in the Name of our Lord Christ. Therefore it is meet for us who are of the
Faith of our Lord Christ, and all the men of Rome, and of every city and country, to rejoice
on this day. And we command you to make it a festival each year, as a memorial of those
fathers who fought strenuously, like Peter and Paul, and those who shed their blood for the
Name of our Lord Christ our God, that is to say Abba Macarius the Great and his spiritual
brother Macarius the Alexandrian. It was the thirteenth day of the month of Magabit on
which Lucius exiled them from the city of Alexandria to the island which we have already
mentioned, and it was on the same day of Magabit on which they returned, and arrived in
the city of Alexandria.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Dionysius, the fourteenth Archbishop of
Alexandria. This holy father had parents who were pagans and unbelievers, and he studied
many kinds of learning, for his father belonged to an honorable family. Now this father
took great care of him from his youth up, and he taught him every kind of learning and
wisdom, and at length he became a teacher of the pagan sages. As he was sitting down one
day, behold a certain old woman, who was a Christian, passed by, and she had with her a
quire of a book containing an Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle; and she said unto him,
“Take this quire, and buy it from me.” And when he had read it he found in it strange
speech, and he found that it was admirable. And he said unto her, “For how much wilt
thou sell it?” And she said, “For one dirham of gold”; and he gave her three dirham of
gold, and said unto her, “Go, seek and find the rest of this book and bring it unto me.”
And she went and brought him three more quires, and he gave her nine dirham of gold.
And having read them through he found the book to be [still] incomplete, and he said unto
her, “Go, and search for the rest of this book.” And she said unto him, “I found these
quires among my father’s books. If thou dost want a complete Book of Paul the Apostle
enquire among the men of this church.” And he said unto her, “If I were to enquire of
them would they give it to me?” And she said, “Yea.” And he went and enquired for the
Book of Paul the Apostle of one of the priests, and he gave it to him, and he read it, and he
learned it by heart, and he used to recite it openly without the book, saying, “Believe on
our Lord Jesus Christ.” Then he went to Saint Abba Demetrius the Archbishop, and he
asked him to baptize him with Christian baptism, and Demetrius taught him everything he
wanted, and baptized him, and Dionysius became perfect in the doctrine of the Church; and
Abba Demetrius made him a teacher of the children of the Church. When Yarokla was
appointed archbishop, he made this man his deputy in the city of Alexandria, and he
dispensed judgment among the believers; and he gave him authority to administer the work
of the archiepiscopate. When Saint Abba Yarokla died, all the people agreed and they
appointed this father, Saint Dionysius, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, and he
protected his flock well and carefully. And great tribulation and much sorrow came upon
him during the days of his office, for he was appointed during the days of the reign of
401

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Philip, who was a lover of the Christians. And when Decius rose up against Philip, and
made war on him, he conquered him and slew him, and reigned in his stead. And he
afflicted the believers with a very great affliction, and slew many martyrs among the
archbishops and bishops, and others. And very many men fled in fear and terror, and came
into the desert, where some of them died. And the soldiers of this emperor seized this
father, and they treated him with very great indignity. Then Gerlawos destroyed that
infidel, and reigned in his stead; and in the days of this emperor the affliction of the sons of
baptism diminished and died down. When he died and Valerius reigned in his stead, the
persecution of the Church broke out again. And his governors seized this holy father, and
shut him up in prison, and tortured him with manifold cruel and severe tortures. Then they
required of him to worship idols, and he answered and said unto them, “We will not
worship idols, and we will only worship God the Father, and His Son Jesus Christ, and the
Holy Spirit.” And the emperor was exceedingly wroth with him, and he killed many men
in front of him, in order to terrify him; but the holy man was not afraid of him; and the
emperor banished him and he remained in exile for many days. After this the emperor
brought him back from exile, and he said unto him, “I hear that thou dost consecrate the
Offering secretly by thyself.” And the holy man answered and said unto him, “We will not
give up our prayers, and our consecration of the Offering neither by night, nor by day.”
Then the holy man returned to the people who were with him, and he said unto them, “Go
ye and consecrate the Offering, and even if I am remote form you in the body, I shall be
thinking of you in the spirit”; and the governor was wroth and sent him back into exile.
And God raised up against this infidel a host of barbarians, and he was afraid of them; and
they slew him and gave the empire to his son. And his son was an exceedingly wise and
an understanding man, and he released all the believers whom his father had shut up in
prison, and he brought back those who were in exile. And he wrote a letter to the
archbishops, and to all the bishops, and he said unto them, “Fear ye not, neither be afraid.
Open your churches and light your lamps, for no evil whatsoever shall befall you.” And
this holy father lived the days which remained to him in peace and quietness. In the days
of this father there arose many disputes because of the Faith. Certain men of error
appeared in the country of Arabia, and they said with the wickedness of their deeds, “The
soul dieth with the body, and then riseth up with it on the day of the Resurrection.” And a
Council assembled to deal with them, and the members thereof anathematized them, and
cut them off. And again others were [in favor of ] Sabellius. When this Father Dionysius
had grown old, there appeared Paul of Samosata, Archbishop of the city of Antioch, who
denied the Son. And a Council against him assembled in the city of Antioch, but Father
Dionysius did not come with them because of his old age, he sent an epistle full of all
kinds of learning, and grace (or, courtesy), and he revealed therein the True Faith, and
counsel and goodness. When he had arrived at a good old age he departed to God, having
sat upon the throne of Mark the evangelist twelve years.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

402

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 14
(March 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the death of the holy father Cyril, the seventy-fifth Archbishop of
the city of Alexandria; he was called the son of our beloved and acceptable priest David,
the son of Lekuelekue. This father was a native of the district of the Fayyum, and he was
made a priest there. Then he departed from the Fayyum and came to Dabra Filktor
(Victor), the martyr, which is outside the city of Mesr (Cairo) by the Well of the
Ethiopians, and he dwelt therein for many years, and fought a strenuous fight there. This
father was an excellent man, and a man of learning, and he possessed very many books of
doctrine, and he interpreted them by means of his fine understanding. And he came to the
court of Mawa’i (i.e. the ‘Umayyad Khalifah, Mu’Awiyah, A.D. 661), the perfect king,
before he was appointed to his office of archbishop. And a large company of Muslim
doctors, and their teachers, held a debate with him, and they obtained from him wise
answers, and he replied clearly, and satisfactorily, to every question, which they put to him
on any subject. And the report of his learning and holiness having become noised abroad,
the people seized him against his will, and made him Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. And he protected his flock, and he laid down rules, which were suitable for
priests when they ministered in churches at times of prayer and the consecrations of the
Offering. And this father sat as archbishop for six (or, seven) years nine months and ten
days; and he died at the third hour and was buried in Dabra Sem’a.
And on this day also died Abba Barles. This holy man was one of the most excellent aged
monks. When he heard the rumor that Saint John Mahari was accepting the words of the
informants against the monks, he left the monastery, and came to Alexandria and he wrote
down the names of all its whoremongers. And when he was working with those who
labored, and received his wages, he would buy a sarik (i.e. a small cake made of cheap
flour) for a termus (i.e. a very small copper coin), and eat, and what was left over he would
take and send to one of the harlots, and give it to her and say unto her, “Make thyself ready
for me this night, for I will pass the night with thee.” And he would pass the night with
her, that he might keep her from sin, and on her behalf he would rise up, and pray and
perform prostrations, and make supplications unto God. When the morning came he
would make her swear not to tell anyone what he had done [during the night], and then he
would go to his work. And he continued to go each day to one of the harlots, and behave
in this wise. And one of the harlots revealed what he did [during the night], and a devil
seized her, and she perished. And certain man said, “God hath treated this woman rightly,
for she told lies concerning this wicked old man.” And a woman said, “There is no
blemish in this old man, on the contrary he gives us money, and keeps us from
fornication.” When the other harlots heard [this] they were afraid to confirm her words,
and thought that they might perish as she did. And they began to revile him. And he said
unto them, “I possess not flesh like [other] men. Is God wroth with the monks that He
should let them die through lust?” And they said unto him, “Bring forward a woman, and
change apparel with her, for that is more suitable for thee.” And he said unto them, “Yea, I
will willingly dress as a woman, and lay aside evil days. Get ye from me. What do ye
want? Hath God set you over me to be judges? Take care now for yourselves, for ye will
not be punished for me. For the Judge is one and the day is one.” And this holy man was
403

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
accepted by God, and rejected by men. The harlots derived benefit from him and they
forsook harlotry; some of them followed the ascetic life, and some of them made lawful
marriages. One day as he was going out from one of their houses, he met a man who
wanted to come in to visit the woman inside, and he smote the holy man with his hand,
saying unto him, “Thou old man! How long art thou going to continue in this wicked
work?” And one day a certain man came into the house of this elder, and he found him
lying down as it were asleep, but he had delivered up his soul to God. And on the floor of
his house were written some words wherein he said, “O men of Alexandria, condemn no
one before his time; his opportunity [for explanation] will be when God cometh.”
And on this day also died Abba Sinoda the martyr. This holy man was a native of the
country of Behnesa, in the land of Egypt. And certain men laid information against this
holy man before Maximianus, a governor appointed by Diocletian, and they said unto him,
“Sinoda is a Christian, and he doth not worship idols.” And the governor had him brought
before him, and he questioned him concerning his Faith, and the holy man confessed
before him our Lord Jesus Christ, and declared that he was the True God. Then the
governor commanded his soldiers to lay him out upon the ground, and to beat him with the
rods, which they carried in their hands; and they did so until, is flesh was cut into strips,
and his blood ran over the ground like water. Then they dragged him along the ground by
his feet, and cast him into the prison house, which was dark and stank vilely. And
Michael, the angel of the Lord, appeared unto him, and strengthened him, and made him
whole, and healed his wounds, and he said unto him, “Be strong, fear not, for crowns of
glory have been prepared for thee because of thy toil. Thou wilt be condemned to suffer
great tortures, but I will be with thee according to God’s command unto me”; then he
disappeared from him. When the morning had come, the governor commanded his
soldiers, saying, “Go and look at that wicked man who transgressed the imperial
commands, and if he is dead cast him out to the dogs.” When the soldiers came to him
they found him standing up praying, and they told the governor about him, how he was
whole, and unharmed, and how there was no trace of any pain in his body, and how he was
praying with great fervor, like a man who was full of joy and health, and had never
submitted to torture at any time. Then the governor had him brought to him and he
marveled at his life (vitality?). Then he had his clothes stripped off him, and he saw that
his body was whole and uninjured; and he was amazed and said, “This is the great
magician whose like I have never seen before.” And he ordered his soldiers to crucify
Sinoda, head downwards, and to light a fire under him; and beat him with large whips,
which caused him much pain. When the governor was tired to torturing him he
commanded his soldiers to hack him in pieces with swords; and they hacked him in pieces
with swords, and cast him to the dogs, but the dogs would not come near him. When it
was night the believers carried him off in secret, and they wrapped him up in new cloths,
and in many tomb wrappings, and they laid him in a coffin and buried him; and many signs
and healings of the sick took place through his body. And he received his crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven.
And on this day also Eugenius, and Eugandarus, and Alibidius (Abiladyos) became
martyrs. These holy men were Christians, through their fathers and mothers. And they
walked in the path of God, being learned in all Divine learning, and Saint ‘Armos,
Archbishop of the city of Jerusalem, chose them, and made them bishops, not of any
known sees, but he sent them to preach the Gospel in all the cities. And they preached in
many cities, and the unbelievers in one of the countries seized them, and beat them very
404

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
severely, and mercilessly, and they stoned them, and then they tied ropes to their
shoulders, and dragged them along the ground. And as they were being dragged along
they were beaten until they died.
And on this day also Thomas the Apostle worked a miracle upon a woman with whom a
devil had had intercourse for a period of seven years, for she cried out to him, saying, “O
apostle of our Lord Christ, deliver me from the enemy who afflicteth me sorely.” And he
said unto her, “By what means hath he found thee?” And she said unto him, “As I was
going forth from the beth he met in the form of a man who was hurried and excited, but his
words were clear and distinct, and he said unto me, ‘Come, let us have intercourse
together, and do for me all that a woman can do.’ And I said unto him, ‘I do not want to
have intercourse with thee; leave me.’ When I fell asleep at night he came and had
intercourse with me, and when I try to flee he afflicteth me. I know that devils and Satans
tremble at thy prayers, therefore pray for me and deliver me from my tribulation.” When
the apostle heard this he prayed for her and he anathematized the Satan, and he went forth
from her. Then Thomas made the sign of the Cross over her, and he administered to her
the Holy Mysteries, and he sent her away to her kinsfolk.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 15
(March 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and righteous and ascetic woman, Sara the nun. This holy
woman was a native of Upper Egypt, and her parents were Christians, and they worshipped
our Lord Christ. Her parents were exceedingly rich, and besides her they had no other
child. And they educated her in all the doctrine of Christ, and they also taught her to read
and to write, and she was always reading all the Books of the Church, more especially the
histories of monks and nuns. And because she was ever occupied in reading these
histories, she desired to assume the spiritual garb of the nun. And she went to one of the
nunneries of Upper Egypt and dwelt there for many years, and ministered to the virgins.
At length she assumed the garb of the nun in that house, and she fought against the lust of
Satan for thirteen years, and at length conquered Satan. And by reason of the intensity of
her pure love [for Christ] her body became weak, and Satan wished to overthrow her by
pride. And he appeared unto her as she was standing in the court of the house praying, and
he said unto her, “Rejoice, O Sara, for thou hast vanquished Satan.” And she answered
and said unto him, “I am a feeble woman, and I am not able to conquer him. It is not I who
have conquered him and driven him away, but my Lord Jesus Christ.” This holy woman
used to teach the virgins who were with her much profitable doctrine, and many things,
and she said unto them, “I never set my foot upon the steps of the ladder, and I never go up
on the other part of it without thinking I may die before I reach the top of it, so that the
Enemy may not lead me astray through [my] length of days.” And she also said, “It is
better for a man to show mercy, for even supposing that he showeth mercy merely for the
sake of men, if he showeth it continually, he will at length enter into the good will of
God.” And she spoke many other “Sayings” which are written in the History of the elder
405

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
monks. And this holy woman continued to lead a life of stern ascetic strife. Her cave was
on the bank of the river, and she dwelt therein for seven years; no one ever saw her any
day, but she saw everyone. When she grew old and was well nigh eighty years of age, she
was released from the bondage of this world, and she died, and entered into everlasting
happiness.
And on this day also Sulpicius (var. Salafkon), the bridegroom of the holy woman
Stratonice, became a martyr. When the emperor heard that this holy man was a Christian,
he commanded his soldiers to bring him unto him. When he came to him the emperor said
unto him, “Art thou the bridegroom of Stratonice?” And Sulpicius said, “Yea.” And the
emperor said unto him, “Whom dost thou worship?” And Sulpicius said unto him, “My
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God.” And the emperor commanded them to cast
him into a pit full of poisonous serpents, but God delivered him. Then the emperor
commanded them to cut off his head, and they cut if off with a sword, and Sulpicius
received the crown of life.
And on this day also Helyas, of the city of ‘Ahnas, and Sephinius, and George Hadis (i.e.
the new George), became martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 16
(March 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and honorable father Abba Michael, the forty-sixth Archbishop
of the city of Alexandria. This father was a monk in the church of Saint Abba Macarius in
the desert of Scete, and he was a strenuous and devoted ascetic. When the holy father
Abba Theodore, the archbishop who had been appointed before him, died, the fathers who
were bishops sat for several days in a body in Mesr (Cairo), debating and trying to discover
who was the most suitable man for the office of archbishop. And a certain righteous man,
on whom was the grace of prophecy, told them, saying, “I was in the church of Saint Abba
Macarius praying, when I heard a voice from heaven which said, Michael is worthy, and he
is the man who is suitable for the office.” And the bishops discussed together the virtues
and righteousness of Michael, and they agreed concerning him, and they obtained from the
governor of Mesr (Cairo) an order in writing to bring him from his monastery. And they
seized him, and bound him, and took him and made him archbishop on the seventeenth day
of the month of Meskerem in the sixty-fourth year of the [Era of] Diocletian, (now that day
was a festival of the Cross in the monastery of Abba Macarius) in the days of Al-Walid,
the son of Hasimo (i.e. the ‘Umayyad Khalifah Al-Walid II, the son of Hisham, A.D. 724 744), and in the days of Warwan Al-Gadin. And the men of the city of Alexandria
remained for many years without rain, that is to say there was no heavy rain, only
showers. And on the day whereon this father was appointed archbishop, there was much
rain, and the second and the third rains were very heavy. In the days of this father very
great tribulation fell upon the Christian folk; and very many of the believers fled from the
land of Egypt. And the number of men who denied Christ was twenty-four thousand. And
406

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
because of these things this father archbishop sorrowed with very great sorrow, until at
length God did away the causes of this thing, which were due to Him. In the days of this
father, an archbishop was appointed over the Malakawiyan (Malachite), whose name was
Cosmas, and this father debated with him concerning the unity of the Nature of our Lord
Christ. And Cosmas believed that it was even as this father said, and he wrote with his
own hand, saying, “Our Lord Christ hath His Unity, one Nature in His Incarnation, even as
Cyril the archbishop saith.” And his bishops wrote the same thing with their own hands,
saying, “It is not right to say concerning our Lord Christ and to assign to Him after His
Unity two distinct Natures and two distinct Persons, like two men.” And they agreed about
this Faith, and they assigned to him one holy, general and Apostolic Church. And Cosmas,
the Archbishop of the Malakawiyan (Malachite), was pleased to be Archbishop of the city
of Mesr (Cairo), and they all agreed about this counsel. But among them was one corrupt
person, a certain man who was a Malachite, and whose name was Anastasius, who
objected to this; he was an Alexandrine, and he wished them to make him archbishop, and
they appointed him. And when they would not agree, Constantinus, Bishop of Mesr
(Cairo), was pleased; now he was under the authority of Abba Michael. On this man there
fell great tribulation from the rule of the oppressors, and they punished him most severely.
They beat him with many strips, and they bound him with fetters of iron, and they shut him
up in prison for many days; and they brought him before the judges of the government so
that they might cut off his head. And God saved him in order to protect the flock of the
people. And there was great torturing (or, persecution) in the days of the reign of Marwan
(Marwan II, A.D. 744), [and] in the days of the governorship of Gabra Iyasus, the son of
Muse (Moses), the son of Nasir, who withdrew from Judaism to Islam. And he shut up the
archbishop in prison, and demanded money from him; then he showed him kindness and
brought him out, and then he banished him. And he departed into Upper Egypt to beg for
alms, and he brought back to the governor much money. And this holy man went into
Upper Egypt, where he worked very many miracles, and he turned many of those who had
denied our Lord Christ and brought them back into the Right Faith. When the King of
Ethiopia heard the history of this father, and how the Muslim governor had punished him,
and how they had shut him up in prison, he was filled with holy indignation, and he went
down into Egypt, and he came to Upper Egypt, and laid waste many cities and spoiled
them. When he went down to the land of Egypt there were with him ten thousand horses,
and one hundred thousand mules, and one hundred thousand camels. When the King of
Egypt knew that all this [invasion] had taken place for the sake of the archbishop, he
released him from prison, and heaped great honors upon him; and in like manner he heaped
exceedingly great honors upon the Christian people. Then the King of Egypt entreated this
father to write a letter to the King of Ethiopia, and order him to return to his own country.
And this father sent a letter to the King of Ethiopia wherein he invoked blessings upon
him, and upon his governors and generals, and all his army, and he said unto him, “Behold
God hath delivered us from the bonds of captivity through thee. And now return to thy
country in safety and peace, and God shall reward thee in the kingdom of heaven for the
toil which thou hast undertaken for me.” When the King of Ethiopia had read the letter
sent to him by this father Archbishop Abba Michael, he rose up quickly and returned to his
country in peace. When the holy father had finished his good strife he departed to the God
Whom he loved.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

407

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 17
(March 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and righteous Lazarus, the friend of our Lord, whom our Lord
raised from the grave after he had been dead four days. This righteous man was one of the
children of Israel, and his sisters were Mary and Martha. Now Mary it was who anointed
our Lord with sweet-smelling unguent (sic). And all three were disciples of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and He loved them for their good works and virtues, and they were all virgins, and
unmarried. And when the time came for this righteous man to pay the debt, which is
sealed upon the race of the children of men, and to drink the cup, which all men are bound
to drink, he paid the debt on this day and died. And our Lord Christ knew before the
foundation of the world that it was on this day that He would raise up Lazarus from the
dead. He did not save him from death, but He allowed him to die, and Lazarus remained
until the fourth day in the grave and he stank; and then He raised him up, and thus a great
miracle took place. And during these four days Lazarus saw the abodes of the righteous,
and of sinners. And our Lord Who raised him up came to him, even as John the
Evangelist, the proclaimer of the Godhead, who was a witness of this, saith, “Our Lord
called him after he had been in the grave four days, and He said unto him, Lazarus,
Lazarus, come forth”; and Lazarus went forth, his hands, and his feet, and his face being
swathed in funerary bandages, after the manner in which men swathe the dead; a miracle!
And the going forth of his hands and his feet and his face, which were swathed, was as
much a miracle as the resurrection of his body. Now the reason of his going forth from the
grave with his hands and feet and face swathed in funerary bandages, which had not been
unloosed in the tomb, was that all men might know that he had been dead, and that some
might not think that his resurrection had been agreed upon among themselves. And our
Lord commanded that he should go forth swathed, just as he had been prepared for burial;
for this reason it was a great miracle. And if some infidels thought that he was alive in the
tomb, how could he go forth there from with his hands, and his feet, and his face,
swathed? But we Christians believe and confess that it was our Lord Jesus Christ Who
raised up Lazarus out of the tomb, after he had been dead for four days, for He is able to do
everything, He is our Lord, and God, and Redeemer, Jesus Christ, Who is to be adored,
with His Good Father, and the Holy and Life-giving Spirit for ever and ever. Amen.
And on this day also Theocritus, the reader, became a martyr. This holy man was a native
of the city of Rome. And when [the soldiers] seized all the Christians, and compelled them
to offer up sacrifice to idols, they seized this Theocritus with them, and they brought him
to the emperor who said unto him, “Wilt thou offer up sacrifice, or wilt thou put my
tortures to the test?” Now Theocritus was a youth fifteen years old, and he said unto the
emperor, “I bring offerings unto my Lord Jesus Christ.” And the emperor said unto him,
“Sacrifice, O Theocritus, so that thou mayest not die a cruel death.” And Theocritus said
unto the emperor, “Come, O Emperor, thou and thy wisdom, and look upon my
offerings.” And the emperor commanded the soldiers to take him into the house of his
god, so that he might sacrifice there; and the emperor stood at the door, and when Saint
Theocritus had prayed there was an earthquake in that place, and their god Aesculapius fell
down. And the emperor, seeing Theocritus smile, commanded the soldiers to cut off his
nose, and to bind him in fetters in the prison house. On the following day they brought
408

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him out, and put him into bonds, and they also dug a deep pit, and spread logs of [burning]
wood over it, and they cast him into it until the flesh of his limbs was torn into strips, and
the marrow of his bones dripped out from them. And the emperor and his soldiers were
not able to kill him in this way. And they brought him again into the house of their idols,
and locked him up therein, and they thought that their gods would take vengeance upon
him, but he broke them, and spat upon the idols. And the angel of the Lord opened the
doors for him, and he took the gold of the idols, and distributed it among the poor and the
needy. And having returned, the doors were locked again, and were even as they had been
before. And when, after eight days, the emperor opened the doors, they found their idols
thrown down and smashed; and the holy man mocked and laughed at them. And the
emperor commanded them to hide the righteous man until he could make to appear the
gods who had been destroyed. And again he commanded them to take him into the theatre,
and they brought him there, and the emperor sent lions against him, but the lions only
licked his wounds. And again the emperor commanded them to put him on a rack, until all
his limbs were torn out of their sockets, and his body was distorted in a terrible manner;
but even then Theocritus conquered mightily, and the emperor was afraid. When the
emperor saw his boldness, he commanded them to cut off his head with the sword. And
Saint Emerianus, the Bishop, and all the congregation, and crowds of people followed
Saint Theocritus, who was helping them with [his] prayers, and they embraced and kissed
the holy man. And the executioner took up his sword, and cut off his head and Theocritus
finished his martyrdom.
And on this day also are commemorated the saints Gregory, the fighter, and Talasius, the
martyr, and Joseph, the Bishop, and the translation of the body of Nikor, the high priest.
Salutation to Gregory, Talasius, and the bishop.
Salutation to Abba Garima who appeared to Melimo in Dabra Dekhukhan [and] Dabra
Kananmo.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 18
(March 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Isidore, the companion of Saint Sona the martyr, became a martyr. Now
Sona was a soldier in the army of the governor of Farma, and he was a native of the city of
Dakseya, and Saint Isidore was his friend, and they wore (?) apparel of wool, and both of
them gave alms to the poor and needy when they received their hire. And both saw a
vision the same night, and it seemed to them that a virgin came to them with crowns which
she placed on their heads. When they woke up from their sleep, they conversed together
about what they had seen, and they rejoiced greatly, and they knew that the Lord had called
them to become martyrs to Him. And they rose up, and departed, and came to the
governor, and Saint Sona unbound his girdle, and cast it down before the governor, and
they both confessed our Lord Jesus Christ; and when the governor had heard their words
he commanded his soldiers to shut them up in prison, but God sent His angel and
409

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
comforted them. After this the governor sent Saint Sona to Alexandria, and left Isidore
[where he was]. After a few days the governor of Alexandria sent Saint Sona back to the
city of Farma, and the two men rejoiced at meeting each other again, and they talked
together, and told each other what had happened to them. And the governor of Farma
tortured them very severely. And then he commanded his soldiers to dig a pit for Saint
Isidore, and to light a fire therein, and to cast him into the fire; and they did as the governor
commanded them. And Saint Isidore asked the soldiers to wait a little whilst he prayed,
and he prayed to our Lord Jesus Christ to accept his soul, and to have a care for his body.
Then he drew nigh to the pit of fire, and cast himself into it, and delivered up his soul into
the hand of God; and his body was not hurt in any way by the fire, and his appearance (or,
features) remained unchanged. And the mother of Saint Sona was weeping for him
because of his separation from his friend; then they took the body of Saint Isidore and
carried it away and laid it in a beautiful place until the end of the days of persecution. And
at the time when Saint Isidore was suffering martyrdom the mother of Saint Sona saw a
multitude of angels carrying away his soul, and bearing it up into heaven with great glory.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 19
(March 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Aristobulus, the preacher and apostle and disciple of Saint Paul the
Apostle. This holy man was one of the two and seventy disciples whom our Lord chose
before His Passion, and sent forth to preach the Gospel, and on whom the Holy Spirit, the
Paraclete, descended; and grace and power were with the Apostles on the festival of
Pentecost. And he went with the Apostles, and ministered unto them, and he preached
with them the Holy and Life-giving Gospel, and he turned many into the path of salvation,
and brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; and he baptized them with
Christian baptism, and saved their souls by giving unto them the divine commandments.
And the Apostles made this holy man Bishop of the city of ‘Abratabias, and he went and
preached therein, and he converted many of the men thereof to the knowledge of God; and
he brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he performed many miracles
before them. And tribulation arose through the Jews and the Greeks, and they drove him
away for a very long time, and they stoned him with stones. And having finished his
course nobly and faithfully he died in peace; and behold Paul, the Apostle, mentioneth him
in his Epistle to the Romans (chapter xvi, verse 10).
And on this day also are commemorated the following martyrs: Alexander the Egyptian,
and Alexander and Agabius from the city of Gaza, and ‘Amilas from the city of Bunitos,
and Dionysius from the city of Tripolis, and Ramelos and Thalasius from the vineyards of
Egypt. These seven men made a pact together in Messianic love, and they came to the
governor of the country of Caesarea of the Philistines, and they confessed our Lord Jesus
Christ before him, in the days of the infidel Diocletian, and he tortured them with severe
tortures, and they received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
410

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died Saint ‘Askenafer, and his wife Martha, and his sons Arcadius
and John. This ‘Askenafer had many possessions, and much riches, and he was a keeper of
the Law of God, and he brought up his sons with spiritual admonitions. When they were
grown up he sent them to the city, which is called Tayrut in order to learn wisdom and
discipline. When they had finished their education he sent a message ordering them to be
brought to him, so that he might rejoice in their progress. And as they were sailing on the
river, their ship was wrecked, and God having saved them from drowning, a wave cast up
John at a certain spot, and Arcadius at another. Having lost all hope, John went to a
monastery, and became a monk, and he wasted his body by fasting and prayer for the sake
of his brother Arcadius, whom he believed to be dead; and Arcadius also wept because he
thought that his brother John was dead. And John appeared unto him in a dream, and told
him that he was alive. And Arcadius went to the holy places, and he journeyed to the
desert where John was, and became a monk under a holy elder, and he remained striving in
the ascetic life for three years. When “Askenafer heard of the death of his sons, he and his
wife put on sackcloth, and strewed ashes over themselves. One night ‘Askenafer had a
vision in which he saw John, and he had a crown of jewels on his head, and a cross in his
hand; and he saw Arcadius also who had upon his head a crown in the form of a star. And
having risen up, he told the visions to his wife, and he said unto her, “Come, let us go into
the sanctuary, so that we may enquire for news of our sons”; and when they had gone into
the sanctuary they prayed. And they went to the Jordan, in the monastery of John the
Baptist, and they found the elder who had received Arcadius their son as a monk, and they
fell down at his feet and told him their trouble. And he said unto them, “Sorrow not, O ye
beloved of our Lord Christ, when ye return to the sanctuary ye will find your sons”; and
they turned away rejoicing. And John came to worship at the feast of the Cross, and the
elder called John, and made him to meet Arcadius his brother; and then they embraced
each other and wept. And again the elder called ‘Askenafer, and made him to meet his
sons, and ‘Askenafer and his wife wept over Arcadius and John, and kissed them. And
‘Askenafer assumed the monastic garb with that elder, and he made his wife to enter a
house of women, and he set free his slaves, and distributed his possessions among the
poor. Then he put on sackcloth made of hair, and he went out into the desert and [lived
there] in fasting and prayer. And he, and his blessed sons, and his wife Martha died in
peace.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 20
(March 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Michael, the fifty-sixth Archbishop of the city of
Alexander. This father was perfect in all his good works, and there came upon him
tribulation and great sorrow during his days of office. Now this was brought about through
a certain wicked bishop who was over the city of Seha, who loved the glory of this fleeting
world. There was in the city of Danaweser, which was under his jurisdiction, a certain
church that had been rebuilt, and the people wanted him to have it consecrated. And the
elders of the city who had rebuilt the church, asked that wicked bishop to send letters to the
411

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
father, the archbishop, and to the bishops in the districts round about them, so that they
themselves might be blessed by them, and that they might bless their church. And the
wicked bishop did not wish to send to the father, the archbishop; and the people sent a
letter to the archbishop on their own behalf, and brought him. And the father, the
Archbishop Abba Michael, having arrived, contrary to the wish of that wicked bishop, the
bishop left the people in the church, and went out to make ready a meal for them. And he
did not remember the words of our Lord Who said in the Gospel, “Martha, Martha, thou
tirest thyself over much and makest ready a little food.” When the time for the
consecration had passed, and the wicked bishop had not arrived, and the people had waited
a long time, the bishops and the elders asked the father, and archbishop, to begin the
consecration, and that they might read the Scriptures until that bishop arrived. And having
urged this father, the archbishop with difficulty rose up--he the father of them all and
having authority over them, and he began the consecration. When the wicked bishop heard
of this, Satan entered his heart, and he rose up, and came to the church, full of wrath, and
he went into the sanctuary, and snatching the Offering from the plate he broke it and
dashed it to the ground; and he went out being full of wrath. And the archbishop
commanded and they brought another Offering, and he consecrated it and gave to the
people the Holy Mysteries. And on the following day this honorable father gathered
together the people, and the bishops who were with him, and the priests and the teachers,
and he cut off that wicked bishop from his see, and appointed another bishop in his stead.
And Satan entered into the heart of that wicked bishop, and he went to the Governor of
Egypt, Ahmad Ibn Tawlun (born A.D. 835, died 884), and laid information against this
father, the archbishop. And he said unto him, “Know thou that this archbishop possesseth
much riches, gold and silver, and also many churches which are filled with sacred vessels,
in gold and silver.” And the governor had this father brought before him, and he
demanded from him the sacred vessels, which were in the churches. And the archbishop
refused to give them up, and he said unto the governor, “Behold, my body is before thee,
do what thou wishest with me; and my soul is in the hand of God.” And the governor
commanded his soldiers to bind him hand and foot, and they bound him, and shut him up
in prison; and he remained in prison for a year and more. And this father began to fast
continually, and he ate nothing but bread, and salt, and boiled beans. After this a certain
scribe, a Christian and a believer, whose name was John, came to the governor, and
became surety for the archbishop, and he undertook to give the governor two thousand
dinars in gold. And the father, the archbishop, came forth from prison, and he departed to
his house and remained there for a few days. Then the believing elders and the monks of
the desert of Scete collected ten thousand dinars of gold, and the men of Alexandria, who
had sold a portion of their estates, [also] collected as much as a thousand dinars, and the
archbishop gave them to the governor. And this [father] himself signed a document for the
men of Alexandria [promising] to give them each year ten hundred dinars, and the other
sum of ten thousand dinars he wished to regard as a loan from the believers; and he came
from his house, so that he might visit [various] cities. And he came to a certain city
[called] Balbayus (Beles) and rested therein for one day. And there came unto him a
certain poor and needy monk, who was dressed in rags, and he received a blessing from the
father, the archbishop, and he lodged by the gate with his disciple. And he said unto his
disciple, “Say to the father, the archbishop; Be not anxious in thy mind, for within forty
days from this day thou shalt be relieved, and thou shalt receive the bond of redemption
under which thou art liable; and thou shalt give nothing to the governor.” And the disciple
spoke to the father, the archbishop, and informed him according to the orders of the monk;
412

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and the father sought for the monk but could not find him. And before forty days were
ended the governor died an evil death. And his son was appointed governor in his stead.
And he returned to the father, the archbishop, the bond of redemption, and he was freed
from his obligation even as the monk had prophesied. And this father after living in great
tribulation and sorrows [all] the days wherein he held his office, that is to say, twenty-nine
years, died in peace.
And on this day also our Lord raised the righteous man Lazarus from the dead, he having
been dead for four days; and very many people believed because of this great miracle.
Salutation to our Lord’s journey from Jerusalem to Bethany when He raised up Lazarus.
[On this day is commemorated Tsege-Selassie, the ascetic.]
And on this day also Stratonice became a martyr, and glory attacheth to this holy woman.
Her father was a worshipper of idols, but she was a believer on our Lord Jesus Christ, and
she fasted and prayed in secret, until her body became emaciated, and her appearance was
changed. When she was fourteen years of age her father and her mother said unto her,
“What is it that maketh thee so emaciated?” And she said, “I pray to our Lord Jesus Christ
to forgive my sins.” When her father heard this he went to Tiberius and told him the
matter concerning his daughter, and he brought her to the tribunal and the governor, and
the governor tried to persuade her to worship idols; when she refused he cast her into the
prison house. And her mother, who was a Christian, came to her, and strengthened her in
the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then the king ordered his men to make an iron ball redhot, and they made her to hold it in her arms and to clasp it to her breast, and she took it in
her hands and broke it; and when the people saw this they believed on our Lord Christ, and
as many as seven hundred and thirty men became martyrs. And they brought her again
into the prison house. Then they made an iron animal with claws (or, hooks) in it, and they
brought her to it to cast her into its belly, and to hang her upon the claws (?), but when they
did this the animal, by the power of God, became split asunder on this side and on that.
When the people saw this they believed on our Lord Christ, and about four thousand and
eighty-one became martyrs. Then they cast her into a pit, which was full of venemous
serpents, and when she prayed they became like dust. And they also brought a huge stone,
which was as much as four men could carry, and they suspended it from her neck; and
when she prayed the stone split into four pieces. And those who saw this believed in our
Lord Christ; now they were pagans, fourteen in number, and they became martyrs. And
they prepared an iron pot full of boiling lead to pour upon her, and when they grasped the
pot, it broke, and the lead ran over them, and killed those who prepared it. And the king
was wroth, and he commanded his soldiers to cut off her head with a sword, and when she
had come to the place of martyrdom she prayed to God, and a voice came from heaven,
saying, “O blessed art thou Stratonice, for thy name is written in the Book of Life”; and
then she was crowned by the sword.
Salutation to Stratonice.
Salutation to the six thousand one hundred and eighty-five men who were martyred with
Stratonice.
And on this day also was consecrated the church of Saint Abba ‘Askaran. Salutation to Abba
‘Askaran.

Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
413

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 21
(March 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day our Lord Jesus Christ came with His disciples to Bethany, where was Lazarus,
whom He raised from the dead; he was one of those who sat at meat with him. And
Martha his sister ministered unto those who were with Him, and Mary the other sister
began to anoint out Lord’s feet with scented unguent, and to wipe them with her hair. And
our Lord praised her, and He knew it was for His death which was nigh. And he said, “She
hath anointed them for the day of my burial.” And He also said, “The poor ye have with
you always, but I am not always with you” (Matthew xxvi, II). He made known by this
that His Crucifixion and Death were nigh.
And on this day also is the commemoration of our holy Lady, the two-fold Virgin, Mary.
And on this day also the high priests took counsel together that they might kill Lazarus,
because very many people, by reason of the great miracle of his resurrection, believed on
our Lord Jesus Christ.
And on this day also is commemorated Lamech, the son of Methuselah, on the fifth day.
And he lived 138 years and begat Noah; and all the days of Lamech were 753 years.
And on this day also are commemorated the holy martyrs Theodore and Timothy.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 22
(March 31)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day our Lord Jesus Christ came into Jerusalem and went about it amid “Hosannas,”
in order that what each of the prophets in his time had prophesied concerning Him might
be fulfilled. Jacob said concerning Judah his son, who is likened unto our Lord Christ, “He
shall bind His foal to the olive tree and his ass’s colt unto the branches of the vine”
(Genesis xlix, II). And Zechariah also saith, “Fear thou not, O daughter of Zion, behold
thy king cometh riding upon the foal of an ass” (Zachariah ix, 9). And Isaiah saith, “Thy
king shall come, the righteous one, whose reward is with him (Isaiah lxii, II), and whose
work is before his face; he cometh riding upon the foal of an ass.” And Abraham himself
called this festival the “festival of the God [of] joy” when he went round the altar bearing
young branches of the palm. And David said, “Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings
Thou hast prepared praise” (Psalm viii, 2). And Solomon saith, “The tongues of children
(or babes) ordain righteousness.” And he also saith, “And old men and children shall play
in the streets of Jerusalem, and they all shall have their staves in their hands.” And one
shall say, (Zechariah viii, 4, 5) “Make broad thy nails and drape thy tabernacles.” Now as
to the conclusion of the matter; our Lord Jesus came to Jerusalem riding upon an ass, even
414

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
as it is written in the Gospel. And He drew nigh to Jerusalem, opposite to Bethpage and
Bethany, by the mountain which is called ‘Elyon. And He sent two of His disciples and
said unto them, “Go ye into the city in front of you, and when ye come in ye shall find an
ass tied whereon never man hath ridden; loose him and bring him hither. And if any shall
say unto you, ‘Why are ye loosing him?’ say ye, ‘His Lord hath need of him.’” When
those who were sent had gone there they found it [to be] even as He said unto them; and
they loosed the ass. And whilst they were loosing the ass the owner thereof said unto
them, “Why are ye loosing him?” And they said unto him, “His Lord hath need of him”
(Matthew xxi, II, III). And they took the ass, and brought him to our Lord Jesus, and they
spread their garments upon him, and they mounted our Lord upon him. And there were
many who strewed branches of trees which they had cut off the trees, and many who
strewed their apparel on the road on which He went, and those who followed Him cried
out, saying, “Hosanna in the heights! Blessed is He Who cometh in the Name of the Lord,
and blessed is the kingdom which cometh in the Name of the Lord which our father David
[prophesied]. Hosanna in the highest.” And our Lord Jesus went into the sanctuary, and
everyone saw Him. And when the evening was come He went into Bethany with His
twelve disciples. On the following day He went forth from Bethany, and He was a
hungered. And he saw a fig tree afar off and there were leaves upon it, and He went to see
if He could find any fruit on it. And having come to the tree He found on it nothing but
leaves, for it was not the time of the year for figs, and He answered and said unto the fig
tree, “Never shall any man eat fruit from thee”; and His disciples heard Him. And He
came to Jerusalem and went into the sanctuary, and He began to drive out those who
bought and those who sold in the temple, and He overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats (or, stands) of those who sold doves, and He stopped everyone
from taking out goods connected with the temple. And He taught them and said unto
them, “Is it not written that He said, ‘My house shall be a house of prayer for all nations,
and ye have made it a den of thieves’?” (Matthew xxi, 13). And John saith, “After He
raised up Lazarus, on the following day, when the many people who had come to the feast,
heard that our Lord Jesus Christ had come to Jerusalem, they took branches of trees and
palm branches from Jerusalem and welcomed Him. And having gone forth they cried out
and said, ‘Hosanna in the heights! Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord, the
King of Israel.’ And our Lord Jesus found the ass, and He mounted him, even as it is
written, ‘Fear not, O daughter of Zion, behold thy King cometh riding upon the foal of an
ass.’ And His disciples did not know when our Lord Jesus Christ was praised that all this
had been [ordained] of old, but they remembered [afterwards] that these words were
written thus concerning Him, and that because of this the people had done as they did.
And those people who were there with Him were witnesses that He had summoned
Lazarus form the grave, and had raised him up from the dead. Therefore those people
having heard that He had worked miracles, and especially the miracle of the raising of
Lazarus, welcomed Him. And the Pharisees said among themselves, ‘Do ye now see that
nothing whatsoever will avail? Behold, all the world followeth Him.’” Matthew and Mark
do not (sic) mention the matter of the palm branches, but they say, “And others cut down
branches from the trees and strewed them in the way.” And Luke mentioneth neither the
branches of trees nor the palm branches, but he saith, “And as they went along they
strewed their garments on the road.” It is John only who saith, “They took branches of
palms from Jerusalem”; now there were no palm trees in Jerusalem. When our Lord was a
child He went down into the land of Egypt with His mother, our Lady Saint Mary; and
they found there palms. And our Lord commanded that some of their roots should be
415

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
pulled up and planted on the Mount of Olives, and forthwith the roots of the palms flew
through the air, and planted themselves there. From these palms the people took branches
and welcomed our Lord Jesus Christ amid Hosannas, and thereupon envy seized the
Jewish people and because of it they sought to kill our Lord Jesus Christ.
Salutation to the going up of Christ to Jerusalem, and to His entry therein.
And on this day also died the holy father and spiritual man Abba Cyril, Bishop of the city
of Jerusalem. This holy father grew up under the teaching of the Church, and he was an
exceedingly learned teacher. When Maximus, Bishop of Jerusalem, died, the people chose
this father and appointed him to be his successor, and he shepherded his people well and
carefully, and he protected them from the abominable and heretical wolves. And when the
bishops were assembled in Council in Sedreke, this father came and disputed with the
followers of Arius, and he defeated them. And he scattered them and drove them away,
and he chased Acacius from his throne of the city of Caesarea. And Acacius went to
Constantine the emperor, the son of Constantine the Great, and he complained to him
about what had come upon him through the Council, and especially about what he had
suffered from Cyril. And the emperor sent and exiled this Cyril from the city of Jerusalem,
and he drove many bishops from their thrones. And this holy man went to the city of
Tarsis, and he visited Sylvanus, bishop of that city, who helped him and made him stay a
few days with him. And when the Council assembled in Lukaya, this father was one of
those who were present thereat, and he cursed Akayyos (Achaeus). And Akayyos
(Achaeus) also went to the emperor, and told him what had befallen him, and he made
accusations against this holy father Abba Cyril to the emperor, who sent and again exiled
him. When Constantine died, and his son Constantine reigned, he sent and brought back
this father from exile to his throne, and he also brought back all those bishops whom his
father had exiled. And this father lived for the remainder of his days in peace and
quietness. When Theodosius the Great reigned, and a Council of One Hundred and Fifty
Bishops were assembled in Constantinople, on account of Macedonius, and Sabellius, and
Apollinarius, this father came and cursed all those who followed them. And he added to
the prayer of the Faith which the Three Hundred and Eighteen Orthodox Fathers had drawn
up from the place where it saith, “And we believe in the Holy Spirit” to the end thereof.
And this father composed many Homilies and Exhortations, and he composed also a
second book which contained eighteen Homilies on the translation of the prayer of the
Faith (i.e. Creed), and this book is exceedingly profitable, and is full of all kinds of
wisdom. And he sat on the Episcopal throne three and thirty years, and died in peace.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

416

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 23
(April 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the prophet Daniel. This righteous man was the son of the daughter of
Yonakir. When Nebuchadnezzar captured Jerusalem in the seventeenth year of his reign
he took Yonakir the son of Jehoiakim, and his three sons, and Daniel, his daughter’s son,
and he carried off into captivity, with them, many men of the children of Israel. And he
took all the goods which were in the king’s house, and all that were in the house of God,
even as Isaiah the prophet had prophesied to Hezekiah the king. And this Daniel was a
very young man, and he contended in the ascetic life strenuously and thoroughly, and the
Spirit of God descended upon him; and he prophesied in the city of Babylon. And in the
fourth year after he had been made captive, Nebuchadnezzar saw a vision, the appearance
and interpretation of which were terrifying, and he was exceedingly troubled. When he
awoke from his sleep he forgot that vision. And he gathered together all the wise men of
Babylon, and demanded of them that they should tell him what that vision had been, and
the interpretation thereof; and they knew neither what the vision had been nor the
interpretation thereof. And he commanded his soldiers to kill all the wise men of Babylon,
because [they could not tell him] the dream which he had seen. When Daniel heard that
the king had commanded them to kill all the wise men of Babylon, [fearing] that he would
also kill him and his companions, the Three Children, he sought out the chief steward. who
said unto him concerning the dream which the king had seen, “All the wise men of
Babylon and Egypt are unable to describe it, or to interpret it.” And Daniel said unto the
chief steward, “Speak unto the king on my behalf, and tell him that I can interpret the
dream which he hath seen.” Then Daniel and his companions, the Three Children who
were with him, prayed to God and entreated Him to reveal to him the king’s vision, and the
interpretation thereof. And God revealed unto Daniel the king’s vision, and even the
interpretation thereof; and Daniel went in to the king’s presence and told him the dream
and the interpretation thereof. And he showed him that it concerned the kings who were to
reign after him, and what would happen unto each one of them. And the words of Daniel
pleased Nebuchadnezzar, and he bowed down before him, and he embraced him with
embraces, and he bestowed very great favors upon him, and he appointed him chief of all
the wise men of Babylon. Then Nebuchadnezzar saw another dream, and Daniel
interpreted it also to him, and he made him know the meaning thereof, saying, “Because of
thine arrogance, God will make thee to go forth from among the race of men, and He will
make thee to dwell with the beasts in the desert for seven years, and thou shalt eat grass
like the beasts. After this He will restore thee to thy kingdom”; and all his prophecy was
fulfilled even as he spoke. And after Nebuchadnezzar died, Daniel interpreted to
Belshazzar, his son, that which the angel wrote for him on the wall, when he was drinking
out of the holy vessels of the house of God. And he made known unto him that his number
was written, and that he was measured, and weighed, and that the interpretation thereof
was, “God hath prepared thy throne and thy kingdom for another, for He hath weighed thee
in a balance, and found thee wanting, and He hath made thy kingdom to pass to the
kingdom of Mani, and to the kingdom of Persia”; and his prophecy was fulfilled. And God
showed him in visions all the kings who were to reign after him until the end of the world,
and the appearance of the False Christ; and he also saw the glory (or, praise) of God, and
His greatness, and he saw the glory of our Lord Christ, and His Godhead. And he
417

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
prophesied concerning His coming, and he assigned to it a known period of years. When
these years were ended, our Lord Christ came, even as Daniel had prophesied, and he said,
“Our Lord Christ shall come, and they will kill Him. And after Him there shall never be
another savior of Jerusalem, for Jerusalem, and the sanctuary, after the Crucifixion of our
Lord Christ, shall be laid waste, and the offerings and the altars shall be abolished”; and all
these things were fulfilled even as he prophesied. And there was in the city of Babylon a
certain idol the name of which was Bel, and they used to give him each day twelve
measures of the finest wheaten flour, and forty rams, and seven skins of wine. And Koros
(Cyrus), the King of Persia, used to worship him every day, and he thought that that idol
ate and drank that which they used to give him from the king’s house. And Daniel rebuked
the king because of this, and he said unto him. “This idol neither eateth nor drinketh”; and
the king was wroth, and he asked the priests of the idol about the idol Bel. And he said
unto them, “Is it true the Bel neither eateth nor drinketh?” And the priests said unto him,
“Verily Bel the Idol eateth and drinketh what is given unto him every day.” Then they laid
before the idol all the food and drink, and the king was to watch for the meal-time [of the
idol]; and the priests went out. After they had gone out Daniel commanded [the servants]
to bring some ashes, and they brought them to him, and he scattered them about the house
of the idol whilst the king was looking on with his eyes; then the king and Daniel sealed
the temple with the king’s seal, and they departed to their abodes. Now the priests of the
idol had a passage into the temple under the earth, and they came into the temple thereby,
and took the food and the drink which were before the idols, and departed. And on the
following day the king opened the house of idols, and did not find the meat and drink
where the priests had laid them, and the king cried out, saying, “Great art thou, O Bel, who
hast put Daniel to shame.” And Daniel laughed at him, and he showed the king the marks
of the feet of men in the ashes. Now before this the king said unto Daniel, “Why dost thou
not worship Bel, my god?” And Daniel said unto him, “As for me, I do not worship idols,
but I worship the Living God Who created the heavens and the earth.” It was because of
this Daniel revealed unto the king that the idol Bel neither ate nor drank. And he showed
the king the marks of the feet of the priests in the ashes, and Daniel said unto the king,
“See, O king, on the ground the [marks of] the feet of men, and woman, and children.”
And straightway the king was wroth, and he slew the priests of the gods, and their women
and their children; and he gave the idol Bel to Daniel, and Daniel broke him in pieces and
destroyed the temple. And there was also a great serpent which the men of Babylon used
to worship. And the king said unto Daniel, “Now, thou canst not say that this serpent is
not a god; do thou then worship him, for he is the Living God.” And Daniel said unto the
king, “I worship only the Living God, but give me authority to slay this serpent without
sword or staff”; and the king said unto him, “I have given him to thee.” And Daniel took
bitumen, and hair, and fat, and boiled them together, and he made [the mixture] into small
cakes, like bread, and he cast these into the mouth of the serpent, and it swallowed them
and died. And Daniel said unto the people, “Behold the gods of the men of Babylon!”
When they heard this they gathered together to the king, and they cried out, saying, “Hath
the Jew Daniel become king? Behold he hath broken Bel in pieces, and hath slain the
priests and the serpent.” And they said unto the king, “If thou dost not give unto us this
Daniel that we may kill him, we will kill thee and the men of thy house”; and the king was
exceedingly sorry for Daniel. And the people seized Daniel and cast him into a den of
lions, that the lions might rend him in pieces. Now there were seven lions in the den, and
they used to give them each day the bodies of two men and two goats; but in these days
they gave them nothing to eat, so that they might become famished and devour Daniel.
418

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And God sent an angel and he carried Habakkuk from Jerusalem, as he was carrying food
for the reapers, and he laid it down in the den, in Babylon, before Daniel; and Daniel ate
and was comforted by the words of Habakkuk. And at that moment the angel of God took
Habakkuk back to Jerusalem. And on the seventh day the king came to the den to weep
over Daniel--now he thought that Daniel was dead--and to look into the den. And the king
saw Daniel sitting down, and the lions were licking his feet like cats. And the king cried
out with a loud voice, saying, “Great is the God of Daniel, Who hath made the lions to be
submissive to him, and so like unto cats that they lick his feet.” And straightway the king
commanded his servants to take Daniel up out of the den, and to seize his enemies, who
had made accusations against him, and cast them into the den. And at that moment the
lions devoured them before the king and before Daniel. And Daniel dwelt in the city of
Babylon until the children of Israel returned to Jerusalem, that is to say, seventy years, and
he died in peace. Salutation to Daniel.
And on this day also the Council of the Jews assembled in the house of Caiaphas, that they
might take counsel together against our Lord.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 24
(April 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Macarius, the fifty-ninth Archbishop of Alexandria.
This holy man was a native of the city, the name of which is Sebra, and from his youth up
he rejected the world, and he wished to adopt the garb of monasticism. He went into the
desert of Scete, and became a monk in the church of Saint Abba Macarius, and he
contended strenuously in the monastic life, and there appeared in him virtues and good
works. When Cosmas, the archbishop who was his predecessor, died, the bishops with one
consent agreed to appoint this father archbishop, and they appointed him Archbishop of
Alexandria against his will. When he went forth from his city to go to the desert of Scete,
according to his custom, as he was journeying along he arrived at the city where he was
born. And it was like a living person, for it was righteous and pure, and feared God, and it
hated the glory of this transitory world and loved heavenly glory. And this father came
and arrived in that city, wherein he was born, in order to embrace his mother. When his
mother heard that he had arrived she did not go out to him. When he had come into the
house he found her sitting down weaving, and she neither rose up before him, nor
embraced him. And he thinking that she did not know him said unto her, “Am I not your
son? Why dost thou not embrace me? Or peradventure thou dost not know me?” And she
answered and said unto him, “I know thee, only thou dost not know thyself. On my part I
would rather see thee dead and buried, than see thee in the archiepiscopate. Formerly thou
hadst to search out thine own sins only, but now thou hast to search out the sins of all thy
flock”; and they two wept together. And the word entered his heart, and every day he
remembered his mother’s words, and he contended strenuously in himself, and to protect
his flock. He made the people vigilant by reading to them the Scriptures, and works of
admonition, and he took good heed not to lay his hand on any man, and not to make a
419

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
bishop, or a priest, unless the man was the best fitted for the office. He never took any of
the property of the Church, which it was not right for him to take, and he appointed no man
to an office without the testimony of righteous and blessed priests. And he commanded
the bishops and the priests to watch their people, and to protect them with homilies and
admonitions. He sat on the throne of Mark the Evangelist twenty years, quietly and in
peace, and during his days in the Orthodox and well-managed churches services for prayer
and the Holy Offering were held regularly; and he died in peace. Salutation to Macarius
the Archbishop.
And on this day also the Council of the Jews (i.e. the Sanhedrim) devised many plans
against our Lord.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 25
(April 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great saint and apostle Onesiphorus, one of the Seventy-two disciples,
whom our Lord chose. This holy man was one of the children of Israel, and he belonged to
the tribe of Benjamin; his parents kept the Law of the Thorah (i.e. the Pentateuch), and
they followed our Redeemer at the same time. They were of the number of those who
clung to Him so that they might see His works, and the greatness of His miracles, and hear
His teachings. And Onesiphorus remained thus for a few days watching always the many
miracles and changes that were wrought. And when our Lord raised the son of the widow
of the city of Nain, he was with Him, and was one of the number of those who dwelt there.
When he saw this miracle he demanded through it another miracle. And he did not delay,
but at once forsook the light of the Lamp of the Jews, for he wished for [that of] the Sun of
righteousness. And he drew nigh unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and believed on Him, and
was baptized by His hand. And having received the gracious gift of the Holy Spirit, the
Paraclete, he came to Zion with the Apostles, and he followed them and ministered unto
them, and preached in many cities. And the Apostles made him bishop of the countries of
Athens, and he preached in them, and he made the people to know Christian baptism, and
he illumined their souls with teaching and admonition; and he healed both their souls and
their bodies. And having finished his strife, he died in peace, and received the crown of
glory of the victor. All the days of his life were seventy years; of these he lived twentynine under the Law of the Jews, and forty-one years under the Christian Law. And behold,
the Apostle Paul mentions him in the Epistle to Timothy (2 Timothy i, xiv; iv, xix), and in
his other Epistles. Salutation to Onesiphorus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

420

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
MEGABIT 26
(April 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and blessed woman Eupraxia. This holy woman was the
daughter of a great noble who was a member of the Senate of the city of Rome, and who
was a kinsman of the Emperor Honorius. When her father was dying Emperor Honorius
issued commands that his daughter was to be well protected. After her father’s death the
Emperor Honorius betrothed her to a certain noble, who belonged to a great and noble
family. About that time her mother went to the country of Egypt to receive the revenues of
her estates, and the fruit of her orchards, which her husband had left her, and she took her
holy daughter who was then nine years of age, with her. When she arrived in the land of
Egypt, she dwelt in a certain house for virgins until she had finished her work. Now the
virgins of that house lived lives of strenuous asceticism, and they never ate food, which
contained meat, and they neither partook of oil nor of sweet fruits; and they at no time
drank wine. And Eupraxia loved the life in that house, and she was greatly pleased with
the ministration thereof. And the mother superior thereof said unto her, “Promise me that
thou wilt not go forth from this house, and that thou wilt not return, and seek out him to
whom thou art betrothed”; and she promised her this thing. When her mother had finished
her work, she wished to return to her native land, but this holy woman did not wish to
return with her mother, and she said unto her, “I have vowed myself to our Lord Jesus
Christ.” When her mother knew that Eupraxia would not go with her, she gave all her
goods to the poor and needy, and she lived with her daughter in the house for many years,
and died [there]. When the Emperor Honorius heard that she was dead, he sent messengers
to bring her daughter Eupraxia [to Rome], so that he might give her in marriage to the man
unto whom he had betrothed her. And the holy woman sent a letter to Honorius the
emperor and said unto him, “Know, O Emperor, that I have vowed myself to our Lord
Jesus Christ, and I cannot break the covenant which I have covenanted with Him.” When
the emperor heard her message he wept much and marveled at her wisdom, for she was
very young. And Saint Eupraxia contended strenuously in the ascetic life, and she devoted
herself with zeal to spiritual songs and hymns. She [at first] fasted two days at a time, and
every ten days she fasted for three days, and then for four days, and afterwards she fasted
for a week at a time; and during the great and holy fast of the Forty days she never ate
anything, which was cooked with fire. And Satan was jealous of her, and he smote her
with many severe blows in her feet, ad she continued to be sick for many days. After this
God had compassion upon her and He healed her sickness, and gave her the power to heal
the sick, and she healed many sick persons; and she was submissive and obedient to the
abbess in humility, and she was beloved by every virgin. One night the abbess saw a
vision of a habitation and crowns, which had been prepared, and she wondered and said,
“Who are these for? Is there anyone here with me who is meet for them?” And one said
unto her, “This abode and these crowns are for thy daughter Eupraxia, and she will come
hither to Me.” And the abbess told the virgins of the vision which she had seen, and
commanded them not to tell Eupraxia about it. Now God wished to give her rest, and she
fell sick of a slight fever. And the virgins gathered together to her, and the abbess and the
mother superior with whom she had made a covenant, and they all asked her to remember
them; and then she died in peace. And the virgins wept and sorrowed for her exceedingly,
for they missed the holy maiden sorely. Now after Eupraxia, her friend the mother
421

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
superior died, and a few days later the abbess fell sick. And she gathered together the
virgins and she said unto them, “Choose whom ye will appoint to be abbess over you after
my death, for I am going to God, and Eupraxia hath asked for me; and now shut the door
on me.” And the virgins went and did as the abbess had commanded them, and when they
came on the following morning to her they found that she was dead. Salutation to
Eupraxia.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Perpeius. Salutation to the glorious Saraius,
the man of God.
And on this day also our Lord washed the feet of His disciples, and He said unto them,
“Do ye also this for each other.”
And on this day also Judas betrayed our Lord, and he received his price, thirty pieces of
silver, even as the prophets foretold.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 27
(April 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and blessed father, the Lamp of the Desert, the father of all the
monks, Abba Macarius, of the desert of Scete. This holy man was a native of the city of
Sasawir, on the borders of Manuf, in the north of Egypt. His parents were good and
righteous men; his father’s name was Abraham and his mother’s name was Sara. This
woman, like Sarah and Elisabeth, walked in the commandments of God, in humility. Her
father was a priest and an honorable man, and he ministered in the sanctuary continually,
in the fear of God, and in purity and holiness. And God blessed them, and he made them
rich in all their works, and they gave alms daily to the poor and needy, and they showed
the way (i.e. were examples) for all men, and they contended always in fasting and prayer.
Now they had no son. And a vision from God appeared unto Abraham, and it made him to
know that God was about to give him a son, and memorial of whom should be all the ends
of the earth, and that this son should beget spiritual sons. And God gave him this holy man
Macarius, the interpretation of whose name is “Blessed.” And the grace of God was upon
him from his youth, and he was obedient to his parents. When he arrived at man’s estate,
his parents wished to marry him to a wife, and although he did not wish this thing, he set
himself to perform their desire, and he submitted to them and married a wife against his
will. When he came into the marriage-chamber, he feigned illness, and he remained for
several days in this state. After this he sought his father, and said unto him, “Let me go
into the desert to recover a little from this illness”; and he entreated God every day at the
hour of prayer to direct him in the doing of His ordinances. After this he departed to the
desert of Scete. Whilst he was in the desert he saw a vision, and it seemed that one of the
Cherubim, with six wings, took his hands, and bore him up to the top of a mountain, and
showed him all the desert, the east and the west, and the length and the breadth thereof.
And the cherub said unto him, “Behold, God hath given this desert unto thee and thy sons
for an inheritance.” When he returned from the desert he found that the maiden [his wife]
422

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
was sick, and subsequently she died in her virginity; and Macarius thanked our Lord Jesus
Christ greatly. And after a few days his parents died also, and he gave all the goods, which
they had left him to the poor, and the needy, and those who were with child. When the
men of Sasuwires, his city, saw the righteousness and sincerity of Saint Abba Macarius,
they made him priest over them and they built him a shrine (or, chapel) outside the city;
and the men of the city used to go to him there, and receive the Holy Mysteries from him.
Now there was in that city a certain maiden who had played the harlot with a certain young
man, and she was with child. And the young man said unto her, “When thy father asketh
thee and saith unto thee, Who hath defiled thy virginity? Say thou unto him, It is the priest,
the anchorite, who hath defiled my virginity.” When the father of the maiden knew that
she was with child, he asked her, saying, “Who hath committed this deed of shame on
thee?” And she answered and said unto him, “One day I went to that anchorite priest,
whose name is Macarius, and he seized me by force and lay with me, and I am with child
by him.” When her parents heard this thing they were exceedingly wroth, and they went to
Saint Macarius, and there were many people with them, and made him to come forth from
his cell. Now he knew not what had happened. And they beat him very severely, and
inflicted such pain upon him that he was well nigh dead. And the holy man asked them,
saying, “What is my sin that ye beat me thus unmercifully?” Then they tied a rope around
his neck, and suspended from it pots which they had blackened with charcoal, and they
dragged him about to this side and to that, like a madman, and they cried out, saying, “This
is the man who hath defiled the virginity of our daughter.” At that moment there appeared
angels in the forms of men, and they said unto these wicked men, “What hath this fighter
done?” And they told them what he had done to the maiden. And those angels said unto
them, “This is a lie, for we have known this man from his childhood to the present day, and
he is a good and righteous man.” And the angels drew nigh to Macarius, and they released
him from his bonds, and they cast the pots from him. And those wicked men said unto the
angels, “We will not let this man go until he giveth us what he is bound to give.” And a
certain man who used to buy the work of the hands of Macarius undertook on his behalf to
give to the girl food until she brought forth the child; and he took Macarius and departed to
his cell. And Macarius reproached himself, saying, “O Macarius, behold thou hast now a
wife and a child, and it is meet for thee to work night and day for thine own food, and for
that of thy child and thy wife.” And he worked continually at weaving mats and baskets,
and he gave them to that man, the kind brother, who ministered unto him; and he sold them
and gave the money to the woman [to buy] food. And he continued to work in this wise
until the time drew nigh when the woman would bring forth her child. When the day for
her delivery drew nigh her labor was exceedingly difficult, and she continued to suffer
very greatly for four days and four nights, and she was nigh unto death, and did not bring
forth. And her mother said unto her, “What hath happened to thee, for behold thou wilt
die?” And she said unto her mother, “Yea, death is fitting for me, because I played the
harlot with such and such a young man, and I spoke words of falsehood against the man of
God, the priest, Saint Abba Macarius, the anchorite.” When her parents heard this they
were exceedingly sorry and they and all the people of the city gathered together, and they
took counsel concerning the holy man, how they should ask him to forgive them the
wrong, which they had done him. When Saint Abba Macarius heard that the men of the
city wished to come to him to ask pardon from him, he remembered the vision, which he
had seen in the desert, and he consecrated the Offering and he partook of the Holy
Mysteries. And that six-winged cherub appeared unto him, and took him by his hands, and
led him, and brought him to the desert of Scete, the interpretation of which [name] is
423

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
“Balance of hearts.” And Saint Abba Macarius said unto the cherub, “O my lord, [this]
place is too strait for me to live in.” And the cherub answered and said unto him, “I have
not marked out a place for thee, so that thou might not quarrel with the place which I might
mark out for thee, and transgress the commandment of God. Behold, all this desert is
thine, go wherever thou wishest and live there.” So Saint Abba Macarius dwelt in the
Inner Desert, in the place of the monastery of the Roman (Greek) Saints Maximus and
Dymateus; and when they came to him they dwelt near him. After their death the angel of
the Lord commanded him to go and dwell in that place where his monastery is at this day.
And the angel said unto him, “This place is called after the names of thy sons Maximus
and Dymateus,” and it is that which is called this day “Dabra Barmos (Baramus),” which is
interpreted “Dabra Rom.” And Saint Abba Macarius made a cave therein, and dwelt there,
and he fought a strenuous fight there with fasting, and prayer, and bowings to the earth,
and incessant vigils; and Satans used to appear before him, boldly, and in visible forms,
and Satans used to wage war against him, by night and by day. And after passing three
years in strife and labor, and Satans afflicting him, and finding no rest, he thought and said
within himself, “When I was in the world I used to hear the report of Saint Abba Anthony,
I will rise now and go to him, so that he may guide me on the path of the ascetic life, and
may give me knowledge and understanding, so that I may know the counsels of the foul
Satans.” And he rose up and prayed and went into the desert towards the east, until he
came to the place where the holy elder Anthony was. And when he saw him afar off he
said, “This is an Israelite in whom there is no guile,” and he received him, and embraced
him with great joy; and Macarius revealed to him his mind, even as doth a son to his
father. And the holy elder Abba Anthony embraced the head of Saint Abba Macarius, and
he said unto him, “O my son Macarius, who art called ‘Blessed,’ according to the
interpretation of thy [name] in the language of the Greeks, the Lord my God hath revealed
unto me thy work and thy coming to me, and for this reason I have been expecting thee.”
And the holy elder Abba Anthony taught Saint Abba Macarius all the path of the holy
ascetic life, and he strengthened him, and spoke many things concerning the working of
righteousness. And he revealed unto him the method of warfare of the Satans, and he said
unto him also, “They will fight against thee in thy mind secretly in vain, and they will
work against thee openly to the death in order that thou mayest be perfect; when they fight
against thee endure patiently to the death.” And Saint Abba Macarius asked Abba
Anthony, saying, “Let me dwell with thee.” And Saint Abba Anthony said unto him, “Go
unto the place which God hath marked out for thee, and abide there in patience.” After he
had dwelt with the elder Abba Anthony for a few days, learning the ways of the monastic
life and the ordinances of righteousness, he rose up and returned to his place, rejoicing and
full of gladness in the ordinances and life-giving doctrine which he had learned from Saint
Abba Anthony. And the blessed Abba Macarius visited Saint Abba Serapion, the bishop,
and he said unto him, “During all the days which I dwelt with my father Abba Anthony I
never saw him sleep at all.” And Saint Macarius dwelt in his cell many days, fighting
strenuously in the path of monkhood, and the Cherubim used to visit him openly. One day
he heard a voice from heaven, saying, “O Macarius, because thou hast hearkened to My
voice and to My command, and hast come to Me and dwelt in this place, behold, I will
gather together in [this] place innumerable people, of every race, and from every country,
and of every tongue, and they shall serve Me, and they shall bless My Name by their fair
works; receive thou them, and guide thou them in the path of righteousness.” When Saint
Abba Macarius heard this he became strong, and his heart became bold. And he stood up
praying in the night, and God revealed the matter to him, and he heard the Satans taking
424

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
counsel among themselves, and they said, “If we let this man live in this desert he will
guide many people here, and they will settle in this desert, and they will inherit heavenly
cities, for they put their hope in everlasting life, and they will drive us out of this desert,
and they will inherit heavenly cities, for they put their hope in everlasting life, and they
will drive us out of this desert, by the pain of the torture of their prayers. Come, let us
gather together against him now, and peradventure we may be able to drive him out of this
place.” When Saint Abba Macarius heard this, he strengthened his heart, and he waxed
strong against the Satans, and he blessed God Who had opened his ears so that he could
hear the counsel of the Satans, and he knew their feebleness. After this the Satans gathered
together against him, and they waged a great war against him, and they lighted a fire by the
door of his cell, and they took pieces of fire and cast them into it, and the fire was
extinguished by the prayer of Saint Abba Macarius. When they were vanquished in this
matter, they cast into his mind the thoughts of fornication, and anxiety, and pain, and
arrogance, and the love of the glory of this world, and fear, and self-laudation, and
restlessness, and blasphemy, and lack of faith, and despair of God, and very many other
[temptation] of the same kind; with these they waged war against him, even as Saint Abba
Anthony had said. And having remained there for many days with the Satans waging war
against him by means of these abominable things, he rose up again and went to Saint Abba
Anthony. And when Saint Abba Anthony saw him afar off, he spoke unto his disciples
and said, “This indeed is an Israelite in whose heart there is no guile. O my sons, do ye see
this man? He shall become a staff of righteousness, straight and long for many peoples.
And he shall [bear] sound fruits from the mouth of the God of Hosts.” When he had come
to Saint Abba Anthony, he bowed down before him even to the ground. And Anthony
raised him up quickly, and embraced him, and kissed him, because he saw that his face
was changed, and that it had become as the face of a sick man by reasons of the wars,
which the Satans had waged against him; and after they had prayed they sat down
together. And Saint Anthony answered and said unto him with joy, “Art thou well, O my
son Macarius?” And Saint Macarius answered and said unto him, “Behold, God hath
already told thee and shown thee what hath happened to me.” And when Abba Anthony
had instructed him and strengthened him, he said unto him, “Be strong and fear not. It is
desirable that it should be thus with us, so that we may endure patiently all those
temptation which our enemies can bring against us. And for this reason it is meet for us to
become teachers of the many peoples who love spiritual wisdom, that is to say
monasticism.” And he said unto him, “O my son Macarius, remember that word which
God spoke unto thee when thou wast going to draw water.” When Saint Abba Macarius
heard this he marveled exceedingly, and he knew that his affairs and his secret matters
were manifest to Saint Abba Anthony through the Holy Spirit. And Macarius dwelt with
the elder Abba Anthony many days, being blessed by him, and learning his
commandments; and he asked him to endue him with the holy garb. And Anthony prayed
over him and arrayed him in the garb [of the monk], and for this reason Macarius is called
the disciple of Saint Abba Anthony, Then the elder Abba Anthony said unto him, “Trouble
not thyself to come hither to me, for I am earth of a very few days, and I am going to
God.” When Abba Macarius heard these words he rose up and bowed low before him, and
entreated him that he might dwell with him, and make himself fit to receive his spiritual
blessing; and Abba Anthony said unto him, “Remain with me,” and Macarius remained
with him. And after a few days Abba Anthony said unto him, “God will give thee rest
from the superabundance of these evil thoughts. Henceforward the Satans will wage war
on thee openly, even as they have done to me. Be strong, and take good heed that thou
425

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
dost not grieve that cherub whom God hath appointed to help thee, and to be with thee,
until the end of thy days, and [then] he will protect thee, even as the Lord thy God hath
commanded him.” And Abba Anthony gave him his staff, and embraced him with a holy
embrace, and he died, and Macarius buried him in a hidden place, the site whereof no man
knoweth. And Saint Abba Macarius returned to the desert of Scete, and he dwelt in his
cell, and the report of him was heard in all the ends of the earth. And God wrought great
miracles through him, and among them was that concerning the daughter of the King of
Antioch. She was possessed of an unclean spirit and her father sent her to Abba Macarius.
She came to him disguised in the apparel of a young man, but Macarius knew that she was
a maiden, and he healed her, and sent her away to her father and mother; and although they
gave him much gold, he would not accept any part of it whatsoever. And there was a
certain erring monk in the city of Wesim, and he said, “There is no resurrection of the
dead,” and he led many men into error, and because of their trust in him they accepted his
words. And the bishop of the city of Wesim went to Abba Macarius, and told him that that
monk was leading his people into error, and he entreated him with many entreaties to help
him. And Abba Macarius rose up and went to the bishop of the city of Wesim, and he saw
that anchorite in whom was the unclean spirit. And having talked with him about the
resurrection of the dead, that anchorite answered and said unto him, “I will not believe that
the dead will rise unless thou wilt raise up a man from the grave before me.” And Saint
Abba Macarius prayed and made supplication to God, and straightway a man rose from the
dead; now the man who was raised up was in former times one of those who denied
Christ. And that anchorite believed and turned from his error, and all those men whom he
had led astray turned with him. And that man who had been raised up from the dead
entreated Saint Abba Macarius to baptize him with Christian baptism, and he baptized him,
and he arrayed him in the garb of the monk, and he dwelt with Macarius seven years, and
died. After this Saint Abba Macarius rose up and came into the Inner Desert, in order that
he might learn if there had ever been monks before him in the desert. And he saw two
naked men, and he was afraid of them, for he imagined them to be Satans. And he prayed
before them, ‘Elbat ‘Aribon, that is to say, “Our father which art in heaven.” And one
called out to him by his name, and said unto him, “Fear not, O Macarius”; and Macarius
knew that they were desert saints. And they questioned Macarius about men in the world,
and their doings, and he answered and said unto them, “God in His mercy thinketh for
them all.” Then Macarius asked them if the cold during the winter froze them, and if the
heat of the sun scorched them in the season of summer. And they answered and said unto
him, “God hath cared for us during the period of forty years which we have lived in this
desert, and He hath never frozen us in the winter or scorched us in the summer.” And
Saint Abba Macarius said unto them, “How can I become like unto you?” And they said
unto him, “Stay in thy cell, and weep for thy sins, and thou wilt become like unto us”; and
he was blessed by them and returned to his place. And when monks multiplied round
about him, they dug wells for themselves, and built [cells] for themselves. When the saint
went down to the wells to wash, the Satans leaped upon him to kill him, and the monks
came and took him away from them. And when God wished him to have rest, He sent to
him the cherub who was wont to visit him, and he said unto him, “It is meet that we should
come and take thee.” And he saw Abba Anthony, and Abba Pachomius, and the Company
of the Saints, and all the powers of heaven, and he delivered up his soul. And all the days
of his life were ninety-seven years. And of the following Abba Babnuda his disciple was
witness. He himself saw the soul of Saint Abba Macarius ascending to heaven, and he
heard the Satans crying out and calling after him, “Thou hast conquered us, thou hast
426

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
conquered us, O Macarius, thou hast conquered us.” And the saint said unto them, . . ..
And when the holy man entered the Garden (i.e. Paradise), they cried out with a loud
voice, saying, “Thou hast conquered us, O Macarius.” And Saint Abba Macarius said unto
them, “Blessed be my Lord Jesus Christ, and blessed by the holy Name of Him Who hath
delivered me from your hands.” Now when the holy man was alive he commanded his
sons to hide his body [after his death]. And certain men came from the city of Susawir,
and gave money to his disciple John, whom the holy man was always rebuking, and they
said unto him, “Keep this money [as a mark of] affection.” And that disciple guided them,
and showed them the body of Saint Abba Macarius, and they took it and carried it to their
city, and it remained there for one hundred and sixty years, until the Kingdom of the
Arabs. And his disciple John became a leper, through his love of money. After the death
of Saint Abba Macarius his sons, the monks, went to his city Susawir, and wished to take
away the body of the saint; but the men of the city and the governor rose up against them,
and prevented them. That night Saint Abba Macarius appeared unto the governor, and said
unto him, “Let me depart with my sons.” In the morning the governor summoned the
monks, and commanded them to carry away the body of their father, and they carried it
away forthwith, and they took it and laid it in the church; and they sang many hymns as
they did so, on the nineteenth day of the month of Nahase. And a great many miracles and
wonders took place through it. Salutation to Macarius.
Two-fold salutation to the holy martyrs of the holy house of Yasla, monks and widows;
some were burnt and some were slain by sharp knives.
Salutation to the twin images of the blessed ‘Ammat Hanna, and ‘Ammat Wahed, her
daughter, who died by fire.
Salutation to Stephen, whose mouth was bridled, and also to Agathon, who shed their
blood for Jesus Christ.
And on this day also was crucified our Lord and God and Redeemer, Jesus Christ, to
Whom praise in the body is due because of the salvation of the world. The sun became
dark when it saw its Creator crucified by His own will, and that which should have been
visible covered itself over. And the period of darkness lasted from the sixth to the ninth
hour, and in that time our Lord bowed His head by His own free will, and delivered up His
understanding and rational soul which He had received from our Lady, the Virgin Mary,
and that soul was separated from its body. And it went into Sheol without separation from
the Godhead, even as Saint Peter the apostle saith, “He was dead in the body and alive in
the spirit.” And at that same time His body was hung upon the wood of the Cross, without
separation from the Godhead. Similarly His soul descended into Sheol, like a released
prisoner, and it had one nature and was without separation from the Godhead. And He was
exalted high above the heavens, sitting with the Father and the Holy Spirit.
Salutation to Thy Passion, O God the King.
Salutation to Thy Crucifixion on the Cross.
Salutation to the going forth of Thy Soul from Thy Body.
And on this day also died the strenuous ascetic and fighter Abba Hezekiah, the father of
the monks of Dabra Libanos. He was the fourth abbot from our father Takla Haymanot.
[Omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
427

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also the God-loving Claudius finished [his] crowning with martyrdom. He
was brought up piously by the Orthodox King Lebna Dengel (i.e. David II, Wanag Sagad I,
who died 2nd September, 1540) and when his father died God made him king. There was
a certain Muslim, whose name was Grann (i.e. the “left-handed”), who called himself a
king, though it was not right [to do so], and all the men of Ethiopia believed in his might,
and associated themselves with him in his belief. The remaining people in the country
who clung to Christianity, he made to slave for him. He pulled down the churches, and
carried off the greater number of the people captive into Ethiopia, and he sold them to
whom he pleased. And he said, “Henceforward no man can resist me; I have captured all
the cities.” Then God raised up King Claudius, and he began to make war against the
nobles of the kingdom of that iniquitous man, and he conquered them. When Grann heard
[this] he was furious, and he marched against Claudius with tens of thousands of men, and
horses, and Turks, and they joined battle, and God killed him, and destroyed him by the
hand of Claudius. And the captives returned [from Ethiopia], and the churches which had
been laid waste were rebuilt, and the Orthodox Faith of Christ [was restored]. After this
one of the Muslims came with many men of war, and he came upon King Claudius when
he had [only] a few men with him. And the Muslim said unto him, “Let us remain quiet
and not fight each other until the officers of our armies arrive.” And Claudius said, “I will
not remain quiet, and see Christians carried off into captivity, and the churches
destroyed.” Whilst he was saying this the soldiers arrived, and the fighting between them
waxed fierce and strong. And all the Muslims closed up behind him, and they all stabbed
him with their swords, and they pierced him with many spears, and they dragged him down
off his horse, and he died, and they cut off his glorious head with the sword, and they
carried it off. Salutation to the mention of the name of Claudius.
A prayer to Christ to bring Sharad Dengel into the kingdom of heaven, and to preserve the
kingdom of his son Fasiladas (i.e. Sultan Sagad II, ‘Alam Sagad, who died in October,
1667).
And on this day also died the God-loving King Claudius, and the glorious father, Abba
John, Abbot of Dabra Libanos, and a very large number of believing monks, who became
martyrs through the soldiers of the Muslims.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 28
(April 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Constantine, the righteous emperor. The name of the father of this holy
man was “Kuensta,” that is to say, “Green,” and his mother’s name was ‘Eleni (Helena).
Kuensta reigned over the city of Byzantium, and Maximianus reigned over the city of
Rome, and Diocletian reigned over the city of Antioch and over Egypt. This Keunsta was
by race a Greek, and he was a pagan, but he was good in disposition, and there was no evil
in him, and he loved to do good, and he was compassionate and merciful. And he went to
the city of Rome, and he saw ‘Eleni (Helena), and he married her; now she was a Christian,
428

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and she conceived this King Constantine. Then his father Kuensta left ‘Eleni (Helena) in
the city of Roha (Edessa) and returned to the city of Byzantium, and she brought forth this
Saint Constantine. And she brought him up very piously, and she taught him every kind of
learning, and she sowed in his heart mercy and compassion for the Christians, but she did
not dare to have him baptized with Christian baptism; now she was a Christian, and she
told him that she was a Christian. And he grew up, and he was a bold and skilful
horseman. And he rose up from his city, and went to Byzantium, and his father rejoiced in
him when he saw that he was full of wisdom and learning, and that he was a bold and
skilful horseman, and he made him king, and crowned him with the royal crown. After
two years his father died, and he received all the kingdom. And he reigned with judgment
and integrity, and he removed from the people the services, which those who had been
emperors before him had made them, render. And all the peoples were subject unto him,
and they loved him, and obeyed him, and the report of the righteous judgments, which he
used to pass, was heard throughout all countries. And the elders of the city of Rome sent
to him, and asked him to come to them, and to release them from the service of
Maximianus. When he had read the letter, which they had sent him, he was sorry because
of the tribulation, which had come upon them, and he meditated anxiously about what he
could do to relieve them of their tribulation. And whilst he was sitting in the judgment
hall, in the middle of the day, there appeared to him a cross by his side in the form of stars,
and on it was written in the Greek language Nikos Aton, which being interpreted is, “With
this thou shalt conquer thine enemy.” And he marveled when he saw the light of that
cross, for it was quenching the light of the sun. And he meditated about what was written
on it, and he showed it to the chief officers of his army, and the chief officials of his
kingdom; and they marveled, and they did not know for what reason that cross had
appeared. That night the angel of the Lord appeared unto Constantine in a vision, and said
unto him, “Make a sign for thyself like that sign which thou didst see at mid-day, and with
it thou shalt conquer thine enemy.” When he awoke from his sleep, he strengthened his
heart, and he made a cross of gold, and set it above the royal crown, and he ordered all his
officers and his soldiers to make a cross upon their weapons, and they did so. Now this
took place in the seventh year of his kingdom in the city of Byzantium. Then he
assembled all his armies, and went out to deliver the men of the city of Rome. And the
report of him was heard by Maximianus, and he made a bridge over the sea, and he and his
soldiers crossed over to Constantine to do battle with him; and then they met together and
joined battle and fought. And it came to pass that wherever the cross was in front the
soldiers of Maximianus melted away, and Constantine killed countless men of the army of
Maximianus, who took to flight with the remainder of his troops. And Maximianus and his
men rushed on the bridge in order to enter the city of Rome, and the bridge broke and he
and all his men were drowned in the sea, even as were Pharaoh and his hosts. And
Constantine entered the city of Rome, and the people thereof welcomed him with lamps,
and instruments of music, and garlands, and plays, and laughter, and decorations with
pearl-stones, and the wise and learned men praised the Honorable Cross, and called it the
Savior of their city. And they made a great festival in honor of the Honorable Cross,
which lasted for seven days. And when Constantine reigned in the city of Rome, he and all
his soldiers were baptized with Christ baptism by Saint Sol, Archbishop of the city of
Rome, in the eleventh year of his reign, which is the fourth year after the Honorable Cross
appeared to him; and he reigned over a Christian and Messianic kingdom. And he sent
throughout his kingdom, and commanded [his governors] to set free all who were prisoners
for the sake of the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he also commanded them to pay
429

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
honor to all Christians, and not to abase them, and he commanded them to give to the
priests the property and lands of the heathen temples. And he commanded them to give
authority to Christians as governors, and to set them over the pagan peoples, and he
commanded that they should do no business during the octave of the Passion, and what
followeth it, even as the Apostles commanded. Then he sent his mother ‘Eleni (Helena) to
Jerusalem, to search for the wood of the Life-giving Cross, wherein lay his help and his
conquest. In the seventeenth year of his reign the General Council of the Saints assembled,
Three Hundred and Eighteen Bishops, and good regulations for all Christian folk were
drawn up. Then he decided to build in the city of Byzantium, and he built in the city of
Byzantium; and he built a great city, which was [called after] his name “Constantine,” and
he built in it a large church in the name of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer,
and he called it, “Hagia Sophia.” And he decorated it with all kinds of decorations, both
material and spiritual, because there were gathered together inside it the bodies of many of
the apostles and holy martyrs. And having fought his noble fight, he became a little sick in
the city of Nicomedia, and he died therein, and they made him ready for burial and laid
him in a gold sarcophagus; and they carried him and brought him to the city of
Constantine. And the archbishops, and the priests, and all the people went out to meet
him, and they followed him to the tomb with prayers, and psalms, and spiritual hymns; and
they laid him in the sanctuary of the holy apostles. And all the days of his life were five
and sixty years. He lived three and thirty years before he became king, and he sat on his
royal throne two and thirty years, according to the years of the world. Salutation to
Constantine, the builder of churches. Salutation to ‘Eleni (Helena), who showed the
memorial of the Resurrection to the people of Constantine.
Salutation to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 29
(April 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is the festival of the Annunciation which was made to her who was full of
salvation, our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, by the honorable angel Gabriel, according to
the testimony of the Holy Gospel, which saith, “And in the sixth month, that is to say the
sixth month after the conception of Elisabeth, Gabriel was sent from God to a city on the
borders of Galilee, the name of which was Nazareth, to a virgin who was betrothed to a
man whose name was Joseph, who was of the house of David; and the name of this virgin
was Mary.” And when the angel came unto her he said unto her, “Rejoice, O full of grace,
God is with thee.” And straightway she was troubled at his voice, but she had confidence
in him. And he said unto her, “Fear not, O Mary, for thou hast found grace with God. And
thou shalt conceive, and shalt bear a son, and His Name shall be called ‘Jesus.’ And He
shall be great, and shall be called the ‘Son of the Highest,’ and the Lord God shall give
Him the throne of His father David, and He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever,
and to His kingdom there shall be no end.” And the Virgin answered and said unto him,
“How can this happen unto me?” that is to say, “How can I conceive, since I have never
430

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
known man?” And the angel answered and said unto her, “The Holy Spirit shall come
unto thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee, and He, Who shall be
born of thee is holy, and shall be called the Son of God.” And then he gave her the sign of
the truth of his Annunciation to her. And he said unto her, “Behold, Elisabeth, thy
kinswoman, who was called barren, hath conceived in her maturity, and in old age; for
nothing is impossible with God.” And Mary forthwith answered and said, “Behold, I am
the handmaiden of the Lord; let Him deal with me even as thou hast said unto me.” And
when she had received this Divine conception, there came down the Son, One Person, the
Word of God, Who is One in Three Persons, Who existeth for ever, and dwelt in the womb
of the holy Virgin Mary; how this dwelling was effected the children of men cannot
know. And straightway He received from her perfect incarnation, and separation
afterwards was impossible. And His Godhead was with His Incarnation, One [Being],
inseparable, distinct, and unchangeable. This day is the first-born of all festivals, for in it
the beginning of the salvation of the world [took place]. Salutation to Thy conception in
the womb of Mary. Salutation to the descent of Him Who became incarnate in Mary.
Salutation to Thy Birth, Thou, to Whom the kings of the nations guided by the star in the
East presented gold.
And on this day also was completed the salvation [of man] by His Holy Resurrection, for
our Lord, praise be to Him! when He had finished His wise work upon earth during a
period of three and thirty years, suffered of His own free will on the twenty-seventh day of
this month, of Magabit; and He rose from the dead on this very day, twenty-ninth day of
this month of Magabit. As it was on this very day that the incarnation of Him Whom they
awaited was announced unto the people of the world, so it was on this very day that the
living and the dead rejoiced in their delivery from Sheol, and from the hand [of Satan], on
the day of the Eve of the Sabbath. Now it was on the First Day of the week that the living
became certain of this, and they knew of their resurrection by the Resurrection of the Body
of our Lord Christ, Who was the first-fruits of the dead in His Resurrection even as the
Apostle Paul saith, “Christ hath become the first-fruits of the dead by His holy
Resurrection, for the compassion and mercy which are His are great” (I Corinthians xv,
20). Salutation to Thy Resurrection, the day of which became the day of Adam’s
salvation. Salutation to Thy Resurrection, O Thou Who suffered and died of Thy own free
will.
And on this day also Saint Paul the apostle preached in the city of Sharkon (or Warikon),
which was the end of his career upon earth.
Salutation to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

MEGABIT 30
(April 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day it is meet for us to celebrate a festival in honor of the glorious angel Gabriel,
for his honor is great with God, and he was held to be worthy to bear the announcement of
431

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
His birth to our Lady Mary, His mother. And for this reason God had compassion upon us,
with this great gift and honor, through this angel, and it is meet for us to pay him honor,
and to praise him. And also it was he who told Daniel about our Lord Christ, when he was
praying and making supplication for the return of the people from captivity, and about the
coming of our Redeemer Christ. And he appeared unto him, and defined the weeks, and
revealed unto him that our Lord Christ would come at the end of them . . . and that [the
Jews] would kill Him, and that after Him Jerusalem would never have another deliverer,
and that after Him they would destroy the altars and the offerings of the children of Israel.
And because our Lord Christ had appointed this angel, it was meet for him to announce to
our Lady Mary the salvation of all the world. For this reason it is meet for us to make a
festival unto him at all times, and that we should entreat him to intercede for us, so that
God may deliver us out of the hand of Satan, our Adversary, in all our work. Salutation to
Gabriel who was sent to Mary.
And on this day also is commemorated Samson, one of the Judges of Israel. The name of
the father of this righteous man was Manohe (Manoah), and he was of the tribe of Dan;
and his mother was barren. And the angel of the Lord came unto her, and announced unto
her his birth. And he commanded her to keep herself remote from pollution, and from the
eating of meat, and from the drinking of wine, which would make her drunk, whilst she
was with child, and until she had brought forth her child. And she was not to shave the
hair of his head, for he was to be a votive offering to God, and through him the deliverance
of the children of Israel from the Philistines was to be effected. When she told her
husband what the angel of the Lord had announced to her, he entreated God to shew him
that angel. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and he said unto him, “Bid thy
wife to take good heed, and to observe what I have commanded her.” And she conceived
and brought forth this righteous man, and God blessed him, and the grace of the Holy
Spirit of God descended upon him. And he was born with strength, and on one occasion
he rose up against a lion and rent him in twain. And on another occasion he slew of the
men of the Philistines eighty men, and burnt their city. And the men of the Philistines rose
up against the children of Judah to fight with them because of him, and they delivered
Samson into their hands. And the children of Judah told Samson what the men of the
Philistines had said unto them. And Samson said unto the children of Judah, “Swear ye to
me that ye will not deliver me into their hands, and that ye will not kill me.” And having
sworn unto him he delivered himself up to them, and they bound him with two iron chains,
and delivered him over to the men of the Philistines, who rose up against him to kill him.
And a spirit of strength came down upon him from God, and he broke those chains like
threads which had been charred by fire. After this he found the jawbone of an ass, and he
slew therewith a thousand horsemen of the Philistines. And being athirst, and nigh unto
death, he asked God, and He made sweet water to flow out of the jawbone, and he drank
and was strong. And the children of Judah laid an ambush for him in the city of Gaza, so
that they might seize him; and he rose up by night, and lifted up the gates of the city of
Gaza, and carried them upon his shoulders up to the top of a hill. And afterwards when
they were conquered by him, they sent to his wife and covenanted to give to her much
money, and they said unto her, “Find out from thy husband Samson with what he maketh
himself strong.” And she asked him, and he told her that his strength was in the hair of his
head, because he was a vow to God. And she told his enemies, and said unto them, “His
strength is in the hair of his head”; and they waited in a secret place until he was asleep.
When he was asleep his enemies came to him, and they shaved off the hair of his head, and
his strength failed. Then the men of the Philistines came into his house, and they bound
432

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him and took him to their own country with joy, and they put out his eyes; after this the
hair of his head sprouted, and his strength returned to him. And he came into the house of
idols on the day of the festival of their idols. When all the men of Gaza had gathered
together in the house of idols to worship their idols. And Samson stood up in the house of
idols, and he laid hold of the two pillars, one with his right hand, and one with his left, and
he lifted up both of them, and the two pillars fell down, and that house of idols fell down.
And those who died in that house of idols at that slaughter were far more in number than
those he had slain in all the days of his life; and he himself died with them, for he
determined that all the enemies of God, who were very many, should die with him. And
all the days which Samson judged Israel were twenty years, and he died in peace.
Salutation to Samson who was called the Nazarite.
And on this day also was translated the body of James the “chopped.” Now behold, we
have written the history of his strife on the twenty-seventh day of the month of Hedar.
Salutation to James, the “chopped,” whose body was translated from Persia.
Salutation to John who afflicted his body with toil, and who ate only as much bread as the
hand would hold.
Here endeth what is read in the month of Magabit in the peace of God.
[Here follows a long section on Gabra Manfas Kedus, which is wanting in the Bodleian
MS.]
And on this day took place the strife of Abba Gabra Manfas Kedus, the star of the desert,
of glorious renown, and fine old age, the blessed and excellent man Abba Gabra Manfas
Kedus, the desert man, who sprang from the city of Nehisa, in the north of Egypt. And he
dwelt in the desert three hundred years. When he went forth from that place, he wandered
about in the deserts of Ethiopia, and he dwelt in Gekala, and then departed to the land of
Kabd, and he lived [there] naked, drinking no water and eating no food, unlike a man upon
earth and unlike an angel. And he finished his strife on the fifth day of Magabit, on the
First Day of the week, on the festival of Peter and Paul. This holy man had a father and
mother who were pious people, and they were believers, and they were of noble race. His
father’s name was Simeon, and his mother’s name was ‘Aklesya, and they were righteous
before God. And they remained childless for a period of thirty years, and ‘Aklesya wept
because she had not got a son, and her husband also wept. One day the Holy Spirit came
to the place where she was, by the door of the courtyard, and she imagined that he was a
priest who lived in the palace. And he said unto her, “Peace be unto thee! What maketh
thee weep and to groan before God?” And ‘Aklesya said unto him, “I rejoice in every
work of the Lord my God, but I groan because [I have not] a son.” And at that moment
‘Aklesys conceived, on the 29th day of Tahsas. And the angel whose name is Gabriel
came in the form of a man, and said unto her, “The name of this child shall be Gabra
Manfas Kedus”; and then that angel disappeared. And on the third day the child rose up,
and came down from his mother’s breast, and he stood up and bowed three times to the
Father, and three times to the Son, and three times to the Holy Ghost, and he also said,
“Glory be to the Father, Glory be to the Son, Glory be to the Holy Ghost, Who hast
brought me out of the darkness into the light.” And those who were there and heard him
marveled, and his mother marveled, and she remained stricken with surprise until the third
hour. And God commanded the angel Gabriel and said unto him, “Go to the house of
Simeon, and take the child from the breast of his mother, and bring him into the desert
433

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
where there are many monks, and lay him down in their courtyard. And say to the abbot,
Take the child from the courtyard, and bring him into the sanctuary, even as Mary, My
mother, grew up in the sanctuary, and she dwelt there for twelve years in the hands of the
angels until she came out into the world. And I was incarnate of her, because I was
pleased with her more than with any other woman. And I am pleased with the child, for I
have made him pure, and I have created him; for he is of the Holy Spirit. And his food and
drink shall not be of that which is on the earth, but from the kingdom of heaven.” And the
angel of the Lord went down quickly to where the child was, at his mother’s breast, and he
carried him upon his wings, even as a woman carrieth her child. And his mother, and
those who were there, were frightened when they saw the angel carrying him on his wings,
and kissing him on his face. And he bore him up to the seventh heaven, and brought him
before God, and God blessed him and said unto the angel, “Take him to My mother that
she may bless him, and kiss him as she kissed Me. And take him also to the fathers of
olden time, Adam, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and to all the prophets and apostles, that
they may embrace him, and to all the martyrs and the monks, and take him also to the
children who were slain, for My sake, by the hand of Herod. And tell all of them at the last
day, when all the world shall perish, and when all of you shall be with him.” And He also
said, “Bring him to me.” Then the angel forthwith took him where God commanded, and
laid him down with our Lady Mary, and she kissed him, and embraced him. And the angel
also took him to where all the righteous were assembled, and they all embraced him; and
then he brought him back and [set him] before God. And our Lord said unto him, “I will
be with thee; be strong in everything which shall come on thee. All the souls of men shall
be saved by thee. And when the story of the child and his faith is noised abroad there shall
come unto him many men, and priests, and bishops from Egypt, and Mesr (Cairo), and
Nehisa, and from the district of Sabser; and he shall love pilgrims.” One day when our
father Gabra Manfas Kedus was at prayer, [the angel] came unto him, and said unto him,
“Come, go up into heaven even as I bore thee thither before”; and he took him, and carried
him on his wing, and made him go up to heaven, and he brought him before God. And our
Lord brought Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Fifteen Prophets, and the Twelve
Apostles, and all the martyrs, and He brought all the saints and said unto them as He
placed himself by him, “Rise up, and embrace him that was born after you, and who
fighteth even as ye did, and whose glory shall be exalted. And I will be with him until My
coming, and he shall go with you, and he shall resemble me in purity like the angels. He
shall dwell at My right hand, and ye shall be with him.” And He sent to our father His
Person in His Trinity and He stretched out His hands, and embraced him, and He kissed his
mouth, and He said unto him, “There be many souls whom thou shalt make to escape the
Judgment through thy prayers and thy supplication. Get thee far from men. The blind and
the sick shall be healed through thy prayer. Henceforward withdraw thyself [from men]
and get thee into the Inner Desert. Dwell with the lions and the panthers; the lions shall be
sixty in number and the panthers sixty also.” And the saint said unto our Lord, “What will
the lions and the panthers feed upon and what will they eat?” And He said unto him, “If
thou treadest on the ground with thy foot they will lick the dust of thy foot, and they will
be satisfied until they obtain food; [and this shall be] until thy coming to Me.” When the
good angels heard these words they marveled, and when they saw the saint naked, and
without raiment, they kissed him, and embraced him. And the angel brought him down
quickly to his former abode. And his hair grew, and it grew thick all over his limbs, and
the hair of his head was seven cubits long, and the hair of his mouth (i.e. his beard) was
one cubit long. Each day he healed blind men, and lepers, and sick folk; and their number
434

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
was fifty thousand. And our father was exceedingly sorry that men knew of his work, and
his labour, and he said, “I will arise and depart from this place so that men may know
nothing about me, and may not bestow upon me the vain praise of this world.” And he
departed from that place, and came into the Inner Desert, and dwelt there; and the people
missed him, and were very sorry, because he had worked miracles for them, and they wept
and lamented with a great lamentation. And he lived in this wise for more than one
hundred years, until old age came on him. Let now go back to our former subject when we
said that he came into the desert, and withdrew himself from men; and he dwelt on the
right side of the desert for many years. During the heat of summer, and the cold of winter,
he wore no clothing on his body, but he went naked, and his girdle was made of plaited
hair. He prayed standing in the cold of dawn, naked. By excessive sufferings he melted
his body, and hardened his bones (?), and he used to say unto his soul, “Know that thou
wilt have to stand naked before God.” He devoted himself strenuously to prayer and
fasting, and bowings, and to innumerable and ceaseless vigils by day and by night until at
length his body dried up, and his skin became stretched tightly over his bones. He had no
food except, at times, the fruit of trees, or roots, or plants, and sometimes the grass and
berries whereon the dwellers in the desert feed. He took no care whatsoever to provide for
his body in anything. The angels used to visit him, because he was like unto them in his
speech and acts. Among the saints of olden times and those of later times, who is there
that can be compared with him upon earth? There is not one who did not eat the bread of
earth, or drink water, or wear raiment, but he never prepared anything for his body. Verily
Gabra Manfas Kedus was like unto the fowls of heaven, for he thought nothing about the
food of this world, but he hungered and thirsted for God [only]; and for this reason his
food was the bread of heaven, and his drink came from the Garden (Paradise). He knew
that it was not a lie the word of God, Who said, “Be of good cheer, have no doubt about
apparel, nor desire as to raiment” (Matthew vi, 25 f.). And God covered his whole body
with hair, even like the hair which covereth the goat (or, sheep), and his fine beard was a
garment which covered his body, now it was as black as a raven, and was plaited like
byssus. The awe which he inspired was like that of the lion, and it was frightening and
terrifying. His stature was like that of the palm, and the odor of him was as sweet as the
scent of a mass of pistachios, of the costliest kind; his odor had the smell of the food of the
desert. His face was like the face of an angel of God, his beard was a round mass (?), and
his . . . was in his mouth. Even if I were to think of declaring the number of his words, I
could not enumerate them, for they were far more numerous than the grains of sand of the
sea and the drops of the rain. Who hath [not] admired thy contending more than those of
every man? And I will exalt thee above every man, and above heaven, and earth, and sun,
and moon, and stars. Was there ever any limit to one of thy footsteps? The prophets and
the Apostles our (sic) kinsmen speak of thee, the angels bear thee up on their wings, our
Lady Mary calleth thee “my beloved,” and loveth thee even as she loved her Son. And
when he had finished making a prayer, the angels came unto him, according to their wont,
and said unto him, “What dost thou require, O bold man?” And he said unto them, “I
would see God, even as the saints, who were before me, saw Him, and as the Apostles saw
Him, and also as the martyrs saw Him, when they were destroyed in the towns, and as the
righteous saw Him in the desert and in [their] cells (or, caves).” When the angels heard his
word they departed, and told our Lord Jesus Christ all that he had said unto them. And
straightway the heavens were opened, and the tabernacle of fire was uncovered, which four
beasts carried, but did not touch; and there were four and twenty priests of heaven holding
their censers standing before Him. And our Lord appeared, and the archangels, each one
435

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
according to his rank, sitting upon his holy throne, in his own person; and the Three were
seated--Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost; and he saw Three Persons and Three Beings, and
all the angels and archangels in their hosts were praising Him. When our father Gabra
Manfas Kedus saw this, he was afraid and trembled. And our Lord said unto him, “Be
strong and fear not in seeing Me, for I have given thee a bold heart, that thou mayest look
at Me Myself, even as Abukalamsis (i.e. John of the Apocalypse) looked upon Me. What
dost thou wish for, and what dost thou ask of Me? I have come to thee that thou mightest
see Me; what thou wishest I will do for thee, My beloved one, whom I chose before thou
hadst being, and I have made thee pure, My chosen one. Thou hast dwelt in the desert
seventy or eighty years at a time, thou hast wandered through the deserts doubting nothing,
thou hast not feared to dwell with lions, and thou hast endured, and been of good cheer
even unto death. And now, verily, I will not refuse what thou shalt ask of Me; whatsoever
thou desirest I will perform for thee.” When our father heard God utter this great mystery,
he rejoiced and said, “My Lord and my God, I am not worthy that Thou shouldst do for me
as Thou hast done for others like me. Now, grant me ten mercies. Have mercy for my
sack upon the men of the land of Gabota, who are sinners, for Thou didst not come into the
world to call the righteous, who have no need to repent, but to turn sinners to repentance.
Remember, O Lord, those in the Judgment, whose tears flow like the waters of winter, and
who gnash their teeth, and who acted as they did in ignorance, Satan having led them into
error. Have mercy upon them, O Lord, and shew compassion unto them.” And our Lord
said unto our father Gabra Manfas Kedus, “They say hard things. It hath been head that I
do not do unto them as unto the others, who are righteous peoples, and are pure, and have
borne toil upon earth. And as to that which thou askest Me; I do not destroy a monk for
the sake of one sin. If his wickednesses are many, and his sins are many, after he hath
entered the fire he becometh subject for judgment. When he beseecheth Me with great
labour I make the soul of that man to go forth from him, and I scatter it among the winds,
and not a trace of it is ever found; at the resurrection of the dead [it is] not in the abode of
the righteous, or in the abode of sinners. In thy case it is not thus; according to My mercy I
will have mercy upon thee, for I have given thee a promise that I will do whatsoever thou
askest Me.” When our father heard [this], he rejoiced and bowed his face. And all the
heavenly beings rejoiced and said, “Redemption is with our God. Amen.” And our father
also said unto God, “How great is [Thy] mercy, my Lord?” And God said, “To each of thy
years according to the length of thy days I will add two years”; and forthwith the days of
our father were made to be three hundred years. And our Lord said unto the archangels,
“Go ye and bring souls forth from judgment, and release them and give them to the blessed
Gabra Manfas Kedus.” And the seven angels went down to the Gahanam of fire, the place
of sinners. At that moment came ‘Abd Almakos, the angel of Gahanam, who hath power
over the tortures of sinners, and brought out there from the men of the land of Gabota.
And the number of the souls who went forth from judgment was thirty thousand, and [the
seven angels] led them on their way, and guided them--namely Michael and Gabriel, each
with his pilgrims, Saku’el and Ramu’el, each with his great ones, and Fanu’el blew a
trumpet before them. And the other angels were uttering cries of joy, until they came
before the throne of God in the heavens, and saying, “Glory to God in the heavens, and
peace upon earth, His good will to men.” And God said unto our father Gabra Manfas
Kedus, “The men who are in the world shall not see thee, that is to say, the priests, and the
monks and the believers; only those who are good like thyself who visitest them. And thou
shalt not appear to the angels except by thy wish. Thy chariot shall be the winds, and thy
goings shall be like theirs without noise. Fly from the east to the west, and from the north
436

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to the south, and from behind the earth to the north, and thou shalt be able to come to any
place by means of the winds. And from henceforth, O blessed Gabra Manfas Kedus, My
beloved, whenever thou wishest look upon Me, My Father, and the Holy Spirit, the Three
of us thus always. And moreover, go to the country of Ethiopia, and in that land there are
souls which thou hast to bring forth from judgment.”
When our father heard the words of the Lord his face shone and his mind rejoiced, and he
said unto Him, “My Lord and my God, who shall guide me to that country, and how shall I
know the road thither? For I have heard men say from my childhood that the country of
Ethiopia is far away.” And our Lord said unto him, “Go, and My power shall bring thee
thither, and My angels shall not be far from thee, for thou art honorable even as are they.
As for Me, even as thou wishest, thou shalt find Me, and according as thou hast asked Me I
will do for thee.” After our Lord had given the promise to His servant He disappeared
from him, and the angels returned, saying, “Glory,” and, shouting with joy with David the
prophet, they cried, “Go up into the heights. Thou hast led captive captivity, and Thou
hast given Thy grace to the children of man.” And those souls which had come forth from
judgment went into the Garden of Delight, with honor and praise. And the heights of
heaven were filled with joy when [the angels] saw this wonderful and astonishing sight, the
like of which had never been seen from the creation of the world to the time of the coming
of Christ. Grant unto me, O Lord, an understanding heart so that I may be able to know
the work which Thou didst perform for our father Gabra Manfas Kedus, the like of which
Thou didst not do for the prophets, and the patriarchs, and the other saints of the monastery
and the desert; not that a man [who] hath done the work which Thou gavest him could do
what Thou Thyself dost What then? Our father was able to fly in the air, and to go round
the sea of fire, [and to bring out] thousands of souls. He did not do this by the strength of
his natural body which was water, fire, dust and wind, and there was no other like him;
except Adam, the first [man] created. Adam was not able to go about, and to go out from
Sheol until our Redeemer came. O Gabra Manfas Kedus, what is the sum of the grace, and
great kindness, and glory, and exaltation, wherewith thou was provided by God? When I
think of describing thy strife my mind becometh light (i.e. unsettled), like that of a man
who hath drunk old wine, with joy, and it soareth and it cometh back, and saith, “How long
and how many days should I require to come to an end of his history; for the matters which
concern him are very many and are countless.” When our father Gabra Manfas Kedus
looked upon the land of Gabota he saw that there was in him the faculty of knowing what
was hidden, and what was manifest. Moreover he knew the mysteries of the heavens, and
what was in the earth, and he knew when priests were pure, and he was able to see when
the Holy Ghost descended. The deeds of sinners were manifest before him, and they were
clear in his eyes as in a mirror, for he knew everything relating to the spirit. And our father
Gabra Manfas Kedus saw in the land of Gabota that the people hid themselves in the
church at the time of the Offering, now the number of these amounted to two hundred.
And when the Offering was being consecrated the Holy Spirit descended upon that altar,
and our good father rejoiced when he saw the descent of the Holy Spirit. And he also
watched when the people received the Offering, and none partook except those whose
deeds were good and whose hearts were right concerning the mystery of the spiritual
Offering. And our father said unto the angel, “What is the sin of those who have not
received the Spirit?” And the angel said unto our honorable father, “Behold, the sin of
those who have not received the Spirit is great before God.” And our father turned and he
saw the Satans driving the people with fiery whips from the hall of the church, until they
came to their houses. And Satan himself rejoiced because they had become his
437

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
companions, and they were all destroyed, and there were left among them only those who
had wished for repentance; and Satan rejoiced because he found certain poor folk cast out.
Now these were sinners who had not repented for their life upon earth, and they became
soldiers of Satan. When our father saw this wonderful thing, he sorrowed and wept, and he
said, “My Lord and my God, Thy people have been made captives, and carried off, and
there are not left two hundred men, but four who have eaten (?) the ephod of Thy Body.
He saith, Thou givest (or, sellest) Thy people without price” (Psalm xliv, 12). When our
father had said this he wept, and he departed to make prayers near the place (?) of the
Apostles, and when he had arrived there he fixed his gaze on the island of water near the
place where he dwelt formerly. And our Lord saw him and said unto His blessed servant,
“I will shew mercy unto thee, and in each day I will give thee sixty thousand [souls],
namely on My Birthday, and on thy birthday, and on the day of My Baptism, and on the
day of My Resurrection; on each of these days [each year] I will give thee as an act of
grace sixth thousand souls. If Satan hath carried off souls thou must take them from the
Judgment: I have left none to Satan, I have given [all] to thee.” When Satan heard this he
wept with a great weeping, saying, “Ever since this wretched man was created and born I
have been bound with fetters. Where can I go from this wretched man who by fasting and
prayer hath taken my captives and carried them of, the captives whom I took and led astray
by my arts, and carried off into the Great Judgment, before he was born.” And uttering
these words he wished to die. And when the spirit-beings of heaven, and the beings of
earth heard [this], they rejoiced, and laughed, and brought out the souls who were in the
land of Egypt with much labour, and fasting and prayer. In one day the continuous
bowings [of our father] amounted to forty thousand, and during each forty thousand [he
recited] the One Hundred the Fifty Psalms of David, and he sang the Fifteen [Books of] the
Prophets, and the Prayer of Solomon, and the Praises of our Lady Mary, and besides these
he bowed his face three hundred times to the right and three hundred times to the left. All
this he did in one day and one night. Through such work as this the souls of sinners gained
salvation, and our father by his prayer made the Satans weep, and exhausted the power of
Satan and destroyed the sting of his poison, and carried him bound into captivity. After
this [our father] went forth from Ethiopia with lions and hyaenas accompanying him; the
number of the lions and hyaenas which went before him was thirty, and the number of
those which followed him was thirty. And angel of God, whose name was Gabriel, guided
him, and our father was mounted upon a chariot of the spirit, and those beasts were with
him. And the angel brought him to the land of Kabd, and then he took him to Zekuela, on
the highland of the earth, and our father stood on the sea-shore, and looked east, and west,
and the south, and north. And he saw the sins of the [men of] Ethiopia, and they were
spread out before his eyes and planted in his brain. And he said unto God, “I swear unto
Thee by Thy Living Name, that I will not go forth from this sea, and that I will not stand
upon my feet.” And he sat thus for forty days and forty nights, and a voice came unto him
from heaven, saying, “Whosoever shall commemorate thee and shall call upon thy name I
will give unto thee.” And our father said unto the angel, “All Ethiopia hath not been
taught; I will not go away from this sea.” And the angel departed from him, and he dwelt
in this wise for one hundred years; and all his body perished, and his blood was poured out
from him, until all the water of the sea resembled blood, and all his bones appeared like
crystal. And the devils came and smote him, from the east and from the west, from the
south and from the north, in one day five hundred devils smote him with their darts all day
long, for one hundred years. And his bones dwindled and became like sharp stones, and
among the men who were before him, from Stephen the martyr to Peter, the chief of the
438

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Apostles, and among all the martyrs who died for Christ, there was none who displayed in
one day the wonderful things which he made manifest. After this our Lord came and stood
on the sea-shore, and He said unto our father, “Rise up and go forth, I have given thee
Ethiopia”; and he found his bones like the eye of a needle. And He sought for him, and
made him as he was at first. And He sent him to Kabd, and then He took him up into
heaven; and he dwelt for seven years in the lower part of heaven, but above the sun. After
this He sent him into the land of Kabd, and he lived standing upright like a pillar for six
months, and he gazed into heaven, and he neither dropped his eyelids nor bowed his head,
and his hands were stretched out towards heaven. After this Satan came to him in the form
of a black raven, and he found his bones suspended in the heavens which covered [them],
and he sat upon his head, and he pecked at his eyes, and dug out his eyeballs. After this
our father remained [blind] for ninety-eight [years], he prayed continually, and ceased not
in that land. Then Michael and Gabriel came to him, and they stood in front of his face,
and together they breathed upon him, and his eyes saw and his vision became seven times
brighter than the sun. And they said unto him, “Depart to Zekuala, that thou mayest kill
thine enemies, and great strength shall be given unto thee from heaven and from earth”;
and after this they went up into heaven. And our father rose up and went to Zekuala (sic),
and he found on the road three tired men of the mountains, and they were resting close by
their dwelling in the shade. And Abba Gabra Manfas Kedus looked at them and said in his
mind, “I will hide from them.” And they made haste and cried out, saying, “Do not
forsake us at the throne of God. Carry us a little way on thy back.” And our father came,
and saw that they were all broken old men, and that they were covered with grey hair. And
he lifted up one of them upon his back and he carried him and brought him a distance of
one stade. And the old man said unto him, “Now thou hast tired thyself, for thou neither
eatest, nor drinkest, nor weepest.” And our father said unto him, “By what dost thou know
me?” And the old man said, “Go and bring my companions”; and he turned and went,
leaving the old man there, and he came to the place where the other two old men were, and
he took one of them and brought him back to the old man and joined him. And he said
unto them, “Whence have ye come? The odor of you is sweet and rejoiceth the heart, and
carrieth away the senses.” And the three old men rose up and stood up, and the three of
them seemed to be one. And they said unto him, “We will carry thee even as thou didst
carry us for a little, and we will carry thee, and make thee to arrive in the Seventh
Heaven.” At that moment their countenance changed, and they put on the awe of
Godhead, and they became like flames of fire, and lightning flashed forth from them. And
all the angels of heaven and earth came down, and were terrified, and the mountains and
hills descended, and fell down, and all the rocks were broken in pieces and they became
like dust. At this moment the Father of Light took our father and carried him on His back,
and brought him to the middle of the Second Heaven. And His Son went back to him and
took him, and carried him on His back, and brought him from the Second Heaven to the
middle of the Third Heaven, and the Holy Spirit went back to him and brought him to His
holy and awful throne; and the Three Persons and One Being sat on one throne. And our
Lord embraced him and kissed his mouth, and Father, Son and Holy Ghost embraced him
and kissed him; as a father kisseth his son even so did They kiss him and embrace him.
And He showed him the four thrones of the Prophets, and Apostles, and the Righteous, and
the Martyrs, and there remained three double [thrones]. And our Lord said unto him,
“Heaven, and earth, and sun, and moon, and stars, are insufficient to be the price of one
hair of thy head. Depart, get thee down to Zekuala, and drown the devils who cast away
thy bones, for they are boasting and they know not that I have raised thee up. I will be in
439

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the sea, and the seven archangels shall follow thee, and fiery lightning shall go before
thee.” And our father flew on the back of the lightning, and the Three Persons sent him on
his way, and returned to their throne. And our father descended and fell upon their heads
with swords of fire, and the lightning's consumed them, and they became ashes. And the
winds carried away their ashes, and those devils were in number seven thousand two
hundred, and they all perished in one day, and there remained not one. After this the
lightning's and the archangels went up [into heaven]. And our father departed to the land
of Kabd, where there were lions, and hyaenas, and wolves, and serpents. After this the
saints came to him one day, led by the Holy Spirit: (1) Abba Samuel of Waldebba, (2)
Abba ‘Ansesa of the land of Hazlo, (3) Abba Benyam of the lower land; and they had their
lions with them. They came to the land of Kabd, and our father hid himself; and they
continued in praises seven days until they should find him. After the seven days certain
lions, which had been hidden, went forth, and came to the place where the three saints
were, and they seized upon their lions and devoured their bodies; they devoured and licked
up their bodies in a moment. And the saints were terrified, and the lions disappeared. And
the saints were exceedingly sorry, and their sorrow was revealed unto our father. And he
rose up and came to them with the great power which was given unto him from heaven,
and with him there were sixty lions, and sixty hyaenas, and angels bearing the tent of
light. And the hair of his head covered his whole body like a thatch and swept the ground,
and the hair of his beard and neck reached the ground; and he was arrayed in his apparel.
And he came unto them with great might, and said unto them, “Peace be unto you, O saints
of God.” And those saints were terrified when they saw his terrifying majesty and the
lions which roared before him, and the hyaenas which screamed and laughed like horses.
And our father said unto those saints, “For what purpose have ye come to me, [seeing that]
I am alone in this desert place?” And those saints said unto him, “We came unto thee
having known of thy holy prayers, O chief anchorite in all the world, and we came unto
thee that we might hold converse with the servant of God. When we came and did not find
thee we sorrowed and wept for seven days, and whilst we were praying on the seventh day
thy lions came and seized our lions, and they ate them up and swallowed them and licked
up their blood in the twinkling of an eye.” And our father said unto his lions, “Why did ye
eat what God had not commanded ye to eat? Ye were ordered to eat nothing but the dust
of my footsteps until the day of your deaths. Cast up and throw up what ye have eaten.”
And the lions opened their mouths, and threw up what thy had eaten, all the flesh and
bones and blood of the saints’ lions, and none of their flesh and bones remained in their
bellies; and they cast up everything in the twinkling of an eye. And our father turned
towards the east, and praised God, saying, “O Thou Who didst raise up Lazarus, raise them
up, but do not raise up those whom Thou hast given to Thy servants to follow them.” Then
he blessed them and their bodies, that is to say, the dead bodies of the lions, and he said
unto them, “Rise up by the power of God.” And the lions rose up in the twinkling of an
eye, and they were as they were at first, and they uttered cries, and purred, and lay down by
our father, and they did homage at his feet. And those lions spoke like men, and they said
unto him, “Henceforward we will follow thee. Those saints were unable to do anything for
us, but thou hast raised us up and brought us out from the bellies of [thy] lions”; and our
father sent them away to their former owners, and the saints marveled at the work of God.
And Abba Samuel said unto our father, “Art thou God? We thought that thou wast a man
like unto ourselves. That which was dead thou wast raised from the belly of the lions, and
what they had eaten thou hast made to come forth. We have seen a marvelous thing this
day!”
440

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
On the third day of Magabit our father fell sick, and on the Eve of the Sabbath his death
drew nigh. His pain and sickness seized him so strongly, that he well nigh died; and the
hour of his death approached. And there came unto him several anchorites who were
recluses, whose names were, Fere Kedus, and Zara Buruk, and James, and Benyam, and
Joseph, and our father told them that he was going to die, and that God had given him a
covenant (or, promise). When they heard this they wept, and sorrowed for the death of the
saint, for he was the chief of the anchorites. During the early hours of the Sabbath he lived
with difficulty, and was exhausted, now burning and now sweating, but he never ceased to
make supplication to his God, which was his custom with every breath. When the evening
came his body was in a state of collapse, and he was unable to speak, and those who were
by him [sent] to fetch Gabra Andreas so that he might see his death and be a witness
concerning it. When the anchorites came to him, they told him that the blessed man was
going to die; and when he heard [this] he wept and sorrowed bitterly. And he rose up, and
went to him. And it was the evening of the Sabbath, for the day was ended, and it was the
first hour of the night. And he rose up [and went] to the place where he was, now his road
was far from the abode of the holy man, and the place where the honorable man was. And
at the fourth hour of the night he found him lying like a majestic lion in the desert where
there was none to terrify him and to overshadow him; and there was no one in the village
which was near his road who had found him. And he was lying with his hands spread out
towards heaven, even as our Lord Jesus Christ was extended on the wood of the Cross at
the time of His Passion, until the hour of His death. And one saw the light which was upon
him, and the grace of God which was on his face, and the ruddiness of his beauty, and his
beard which was as white as snow. When the seventh hour of the night came his soul
separated itself from his body. At that moment a sound was heard from heaven, like the
sound of thunder, and there came down lamps which were like snow, and like unto crystal,
and which thundered and rolled down from the heavens to the earth, each having the form
and similitude of the other, and they shone like the sun, and moon, and stars. Those who
were there were terrified and afraid, because of the great awfulness of the things which
were taking place, and which had come upon them; and they were unable to touch any part
of his body. And after his death they withdrew themselves and fled, and they lost their
senses by reason of the fear and trembling which had come upon them. Now the earth
trembled, and the mountains quaked, and there was a mighty noise at the moment of the
departure of the soul of the saint. And those saints stood afar off that they might see and
hear the mysteries of heaven and earth which were being performed. And God fortified the
minds of those saints, so that they might understand what had happened to the honorable
man, our father, and might testify that they had seen God in His Three Persons descend to
our father before his soul [departed]. And Jesus said unto him (?), “I have come to give
thee oblations for thy commemoration. Whosoever shall write or have written the book of
thy strife shall pass with thee boldly, and his abode shall be in the mansions of light, and I
will write his name on My awful throne. Whosoever shall commemorate thee greatly and
unceasingly shall pass through the lake of fire, and shall stand unashamed before thee. If
he giveth bread to the hungry I will give him the bread of heaven, and he shall nevermore
hunger. If he giveth drink to the thirsty I will make him to drink milk with the babes for
ever. If he giveth incense, even though he be polluted, he shall be with thee. If he give
flour I will make him to draw nigh unto the heavenly Jerusalem with thee. If he give oil on
the day of thy commemoration he shall be with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob-Israel. If he
bring a lamp, he shall traverse the sea of fire and darkness, with twelve lamps of light,
which shall be seven times brighter than the sun. If they assemble on the day of thy
441

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
commemoration, I will make them to assemble on Mount Zion with all the saints.” And
our father entreated God and said unto Him, “I have lived three hundred and sixty-nine
years, I have never drunk water, I never thought about food for my body, and have eaten
only wood (i.e. herbs), and the fruits of the desert, nor about clothing for my body, and I
continued to be naked, and if I had lived in the sea I should have lived like the fish and the
hippopotamus. I lived in a tree like the birds, and I lived like the stag in the mountains,
with the lion, the wolf, the panther and the serpent. This is the reward which Thou givest
to the saints. I beseech Thee, O Lord, to be pleased to speak to me.” And our Lord
answered and said unto him, “If the sin of a man is not repented for, the man who hath
committed it, not only if he be a Christian, but if he be an ‘Arminu, I will give unto thee if
he celebrate thy commemoration, and he shall be saved, and he shall be with thee. When
thy soul is separated [from thy body] on the fifth day of Magabit they shall make twelve . .
. as for Mary, My mother. They shall make a habitation and I will bless their assemblies.
If he be old, I will give him a good seat. And now ascend into the houses of light. And
take twelve crowns, and ten thousand lamps in thy right hand, and ten thousand lamps in
thy left hand, one thousand before thee and one thousand behind thee, and twelve precious
stones of light, and take horses of fire to bear thee.” And our father answered and said
unto Him, “O our Lord Jesus Christ, if men celebrate my commemoration with right
hearts, unto how many generations wilt Thou give them unto me?” And the Lord said unto
him, “I will give them unto thee for fifteen generations.” Then they heard a great voice
which cried out and said, “Take the body of Gabra Manfas Kedus, and carry it away, and
let his grave be in Jerusalem, on the right-hand side of the altar.” And Michael and Gabriel
and all the angels uttered cries of joy before his holy soul, and each of them cried out
unceasingly, and the angels carried away his body to bury it as God commanded them; and
thirty desert anchorites came to meet it. And the hosts of angels placed his soul in the
houses of light, saying, “Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Hallelujah, all the time, now and always,
and for ever and ever.”
Salutation to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

442

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE EIGHTH MONTH
Miyazia 01
(April 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy father Abba Sylvanus died. This blessed man became a monk in his
youth under the direction of Saint Abba Macarius in the desert of Scete. He strove in
every narrow path, and he fasted frequently for long periods, with prayer and many vigils,
and humility and love. And he was a great father, and God revealed unto him divine
visions and made him to know marvelous matters, as in the following case. One day his
mind was carried away, and he fell on his face upon the ground, and remained there a long
time. Then he lifted up his head, and the brethren who were there near him asked him to
tell them what had come upon him; but he did not want to tell them, and he remained silent
and wept bitterly. When they urged him, and entreated him, to make known to them what
had happened to him, he said unto them, “They carried me off to the Garden of Delight,
and I saw the habitations of the righteous and the places of torture, and I also saw monks,
whom they were carrying to Gahanam, and I also saw many laymen whom they were
carrying to the kingdom of heaven. Why then should I not weep for myself?” From that
day he covered his face with his head-cloth, and said, “I do not want to see the light of this
fleeting world, for after it they will take me into everlasting darkness.” Now this holy man
devoted himself to the works of the ascetic life; and he strove zealously in the works which
appertained to the soul and the body; and he also commanded his disciples never to cease
working with their hands, and to give away in charity what was left of the money whereon
they lived. One day there came unto this holy elder a certain lazy monk, and when he saw
this holy elder and his disciples working with their hands, he said unto the elder and his
disciples, “Ye do then work for the food which is transitory? But ye should work for the
food which abideth for the life everlasting. For it is written in the Holy Gospel ‘Mary hath
chosen for herself the good part which shall not be taken from her’” (Luke x, 42). When
the elder Abba Sylvanus heard him speaking thus, he commanded his disciple, and said
unto him, “Give this brother the Book to read, and take him into the guest chamber, and
shut the door on him, and do not leave with him anything which he can eat”; and his
disciple did as the elder commanded. When the ninth hour came the elder and his disciples
prayed and ate their food, but did not summon that monk. And the time of supper having
passed, that monk, with his eyes gazing towards the door, waited for them to summon him
[to eat]. And being consumed with hunger, he came out from the cell, and went to Saint
Abba Sylvanus, and he said unto him, “O my father, have the brethren eaten their meal this
day?” And the elder answered and said unto him, “Yea, they have eaten.” And the monk
said unto him, “Why did ye not summon me?” And the holy elder answered and said unto
him, “Thou art a spiritually-minded man, and hast no need of food for the body. Thou hast
chosen the good part, but we are men of the body, and we require material food; for this
reason we require the work of our hands.” And the monk knew that he had transgressed
with his words, and he bowed low before the holy elder, and he said unto him, “Forgive
me, O my father, for I have transgressed.” And the holy elder Sylvanus answered, and said
unto him, “O my son, we have need of work, just as Martha worked, and through Martha,
Mary was praised.” Thus the monk was rebuked by the teaching of this father. And he
443

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
worked with his hands continually, and he gave alms to the poor with what remained over.
And this holy man wrote many discourses (or, homilies) and admonitions wherein was
help to carry on the spiritual strife. Having finished his days and attained a good old age,
God the Most High made him to know the time of his death. And he called the monks who
were nigh unto him, and he was blessed by them, and he asked them to remember him at
the time of their prayers; and they on their part asked him to make mention of them to
God. And he embraced them and died in peace. Salutation to Sylvanus, the companion of
the angels.
And on this day also the pagan Arabs of Upper Egypt rose up and attacked the monasteries
in the desert of Scete, and the church of Saint Abba Macarius, and they carried off all the
goods which were in all the monasteries. And the monks gathered together, and prayed,
and made intercession with the holy fathers, and our Lord Jesus Christ drove those pagans
away, and they turned and fled, and there was none other than God our Lord Jesus Christ
Who drove them away; and the monks gave thanks unto God, Who shows compassion
unto them for ever and ever. Amen. Salutation unto each of you, O ye sons of Macarius.
And on this day also (according to what is written in an Egyptian book of the city of
Alexandria, and in an Egyptian book of Upper Egypt) took place the festival in
commemoration of the death of Aaron the priest, the brother of Moses the prophet, the son
of ‘Anbarim (Amram). What is written in the Book of the Law (i.e. Pentateuch) saith that
he died on the third day of the second month of the exodus of the children of Israel from
Egypt, which is to say on the eighth day of the month of Genbot. Now the Jewish months
revolve, and that [second] month became this month in that year, on the first day of the
month Miyazia. This righteous man was the brother of Moses the prophet, the son of
‘Anbarim (Amram), the chief of the prophets, the teacher of the Law, and the brother of
Mary (Miriam), the prophetess; and they were of the tribe of Levi. And God wrought by
his hands many miracles in the land of Egypt. And God chose him, and his sons, and made
them His priest, and gave unto them a title of all the goods, and the offerings of the
children of Israel. When the sons of Korah rose up against him, God destroyed them, and
He commanded the earth and it opened its mouth and swallowed them up. And having
pleased God the Most High, and fought a good fight, and kept the Law, he departed to
God. Salutation to Aaron.
And on this day also died Saint Matrona, and Saint Justus, and his wife, who became
martyrs. [Omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 02
(April 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And on this day died Saint Christopher, the martyr, whose face was like the face of a dog.
This holy man came from the country, the people whereof used to eat men and dogs. They
captured him in battle, and his father became a believer through Saint Matthew the
apostle. When they captured him he did not believe the words of the men who made him
444

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
captive, and he prayed to God, and He opened his tongue, and he spoke as spoke those
who had made him captive. And he rebuked those who afflicted the Christian peoples, and
the captain who was over the soldiers beat him very severely. And the holy man said unto
him, “If it were not the command of God, my Lord Jesus Christ, which maketh me to
endure and which holdeth back my strength, and restraineth me, thou and thy soldiers
could not be delivered from me.” And the governor sent a message to the emperor
concerning him, and told him what had happened to him, and the emperor sent two
hundred soldiers to bring the holy man to him; and he went with them of his own free will
without fear. And he had a staff in his hand, and he prayed and straightway it sprouted and
blossomed. When the soldiers lacked bread the holy man prayed, and there was bread in
abundance for the soldiers, who marveled exceedingly, and believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ. And when they arrived in the city of Antioch they were baptized with Christian
baptism by the hand of Abba Paul, Archbishop of the city of Antioch. When Christopher
came before the Emperor Decius he frightened him, and Decius tried to persuade him [to
deny Christ]. And he sent two very beautiful harlots to him for he thought they would be
able to make him to fall into sin with them; but the holy man rebuked them, and they
believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and they repented and became martyrs. And the two
hundred soldiers likewise confessed our Lord Jesus Christ, the Living [God], before the
emperor. Then the emperor commanded the [other] soldiers to cut off their heads, and they
cut off their heads with swords, and the soldiers received crowns of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. And the holy man terrified the emperor, and he said unto him, “O
thou receiver of the work of Satan and his abode!” And the emperor waxed furious, and he
commanded his soldiers to cast him into a huge frying-pan and to light a fire under him,
and they did so, but no harm whatsoever came to him as they wished, on the contrary he
taught the people whilst he was in the frying-pan. When the people saw that he was
speaking and teaching the men, and that he was whole and unharmed, they marveled
exceedingly, and they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ; and they drew nigh to the fryingpan in order to lift the holy man out from it. And the emperor commanded his soldiers to
cut off [the heads] of all of them with swords, and they did so, and [the people] received
crowns of martyrdom. Then the emperor commanded his soldiers to hang a great stone
from the neck of Saint Christopher, and to cast him into a pit, and they did unto him even
as the emperor commanded; and the angel of the Lord brought him out of the pit, whole
and unharmed. When the emperor was tired [of torturing him] he commanded them to cut
off his head with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of
heaven. Salutation to Christopher who believed through the teaching of Matthew, and
salutation to those who died with him, thirty women and handmaidens, and three men.
And on this day also is commemorated Malal’el (Mahalaleel), the son of Cainan. Malalel
(Mahalaleel) lived one hundred and sixty-five years and begot Jared; and all his days were
165 (sic) years. And Malal’el (Mahalaleel) died on the First Day of the week, on the
second day of the month of Miyazia, and he was buried in the Cave of Treasures.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

445

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 03
(April 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba John, Bishop of the city of Jerusalem. This holy
man had Jewish parents, who kept the Law of the Torah (i.e. Pentateuch). When he had
arrived at man’s estate his parents taught him the doctrine of the Law of the Torah, and he
became exceedingly learned therein. And he disputed with the Christians, and argued with
them, until at length he became certain in his heart and believed that our Lord Jesus Christ
came into the world and that He was God in truth. And he believed through Saint Justus,
Bishop of Jerusalem, who baptized him with Christian baptism, and made him a deacon in
the city of Jerusalem. Then he advanced in good works, and in knowledge, until he
became fit to be Bishop of the city of Jerusalem. When Andrianus became king, he who
was called “Elias,” he commanded [the people] to rebuild the ruined places of the city of
Jerusalem; now his name was called “Elias.” Then the Jews built the western gate, of great
strength (?), and he made (i.e. set) over the gate a tablet of costly stone on which was
engraved the name of “Elias.” Now in his days Jerusalem was filled with stone, and with
Gentiles and Jews. When the Gentiles saw the Christians coming to Golgotha and praying
there, they prevented them, and built there a temple dedicated to the planet Venus, and they
would not allow the Christians to pass that site. Then there came upon this holy man great
tribulation and sorrow, and provocation from the Gentiles, who lived in the city of
Jerusalem, and they beat him often, and dragged (?) him about, and treated him with insult,
and afflicted him, and he entreated God that his soul might be received to Him; and he died
in peace, having sat upon the Episcopal throne for two years. Salutation to John, the
persecuted, the son of Mary.
And on this day also died the holy father, the pure virgin, Abba Michael, the seventy-first
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. The soul of this father desired what was good, that
is to say, to put on the apparel of the holy angels, or the garb of the monk, and he became a
monk in the church of Saint Abba Macarius, in the desert of Scete. He lived in the desert
until he was an old man, and he was set over many monks, and he fought a good fight all
his days, and he pleased God. And he labored and did a great work until he reached the
archiepiscopate, which is Christian ordination in this world, and in the heavenly world,
which is to come. When Abba Gabriel, the archbishop who preceded him on the throne of
Mark the evangelist, died, there was no Archbishop of Alexandria for four months, and the
bishops, and priests, and the chief doctors spent a period of three months in searching out,
and trying to choose the man who was best suited for the office of archbishop. And after
much searching, and great labor, they chose three desert monks, concerning whom it was
testified that they were Orthodox in Faith, and learned. And they wrote the names of these
three men on three small pieces of paper, and they sealed each one of them with wax, and
laid them on the altar. And the bishops, and priests, and monks remained praying for three
days and three nights, and they consecrated the Offering; and they entreated God Most
High to set over them a good shepherd and a faithful priest. And after three days they
called a certain small child and they said unto him, “Take out for us one sealed paper from
among these four seals.” And the boy took out that seal under which was the name of this
holy father Abba Michael, and all men knew that God had chosen him. And he was of the
sons of Makedos, of the cell of Darsen, which is in the desert; and all the men cried out,
446

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
“He is worthy, he is worthy, he is worthy”; and straightway they enthroned him
archbishop. And he entered upon his office with all the gracious excellence, which befits
the archiepiscopacy. And they chose a scribe to write his epistles to every country, and to
every bishop. And this father used to teach the people, and exhort the sinners to repent of
their sins; and all his flock feared him because they knew that God was with him. He was
pure in heart and in soul, and he had no desire for any of the dainty meats and delicate
foods of this world, and he coveted neither the honor thereof nor its possessions. And he
strove and understood the visiting of the poor and needy, and he gave them what they
asked for their needs, and whatsoever remained after their wants were satisfied he spent in
building churches. This father did not hold his office a full year, but lived a little short of
it, and he died in peace. Salutation to Michael.
And on this day also died Marke, the poor, the Christian. This holy man was a native of
the city of Antioch, and he had a trusted friend whose name was Guespar, an infidel, and a
worshipper of idols; and the two men differed about nothing whatsoever except their
Faith. One day Marke and this Gufar departed on a pilgrimage to the city of Bagdad
(Baghdad), and they spent five days in traveling through a desert wherein there was no
man. Now Marke the Christian was a rich man, and he had with him thirty pounds of gold,
and whilst he was on the road he fell sick of a violent disease, which brought him [nigh
unto] death. And he forced himself and wrote a document, saying thus: “From Thy
servant, the son of Thy handmaiden, I have thirty pounds of gold fastened to the black
mule and it is Thine, O my Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, Glory be to Thee! In
atonement for my sins, and for my errors, so that Thou mayest give me the kingdom of
heaven; and it shall not be for my children, my wife and my kinsfolk.” And he rolled up
the paper, and sealed it, and called his friend Guespar, and he made him swear by his gods
that he would do for him everything, which he told him. And when Guespar had sworn, he
said unto him, “When I die do not touch me, but take this paper and the thirty pounds of
gold with the mule on which it is, and give it to my Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God; take
it in thy hand and do not tell my children.” And Guespar said unto him, “Art thou mad, O
my friend? Didst thou not say that Christ, glory be to Him, died, and rose, and ascended
into heaven? How than can I give it unto Him?” And Marke said unto him, “Go to a
church, and when he who belongs to it cometh unto thee, give him the gold from thy hand
into his.” And after this when Marke came nearer and nearer to death Guespar sat down
some distance from him, and waited for him to die. And he saw angels coming down to
him holding a heart of light, and with them were the righteous, and the martyrs, and David
singing psalms to his harp; and the Holy Spirit came down in the form of a white dove, and
He went round the body of Marke thrice. And when the holy soul of Marke saw [this] it
went forth from his body, and ascended into heaven with great glory. And then two lions
came and buried him. And Guespar loaded the gold [on the mule] and departed, marveling
at everything, which he had seen to Thaddeus, the steward of the church, [who did not
wish] to receive Guespar the pagan, but he demanded from him the gold and the mule.
When the priest said this, Guespar said unto him, “I will give the gold and the mule from
my hand into the hand of my Lord Jesus Christ [only], as my friend made me swear to
do.” And leading away the mules, he departed to the church. And the priest Thaddeus
opened the gates, ad having gone in Guespar laid the gold on the altar; and having gone out
the gates were closed, and he stood there. And at the time of midnight, he heard the sound
of thunder inside the church, and light appeared, and suddenly my God our Lord Jesus
Christ came down with great glory; and with Him were two angels, and He sat down upon
the altar. And an angel said unto Guespar, “Come, worship, for this is Christ Himself, the
447

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Son of God”; and Guespar bowed low and gave Him the paper, saying, “I have believed in
Thee, my Lord Jesus Christ.” And Christ ordered the angels to weigh the gold, and there
were thirty pounds, and our Lord commanded Guespar to be baptized by the priest
Thaddeus, and he and all the men of his house were baptized, now they were in number
seventy-five souls. And Guespar died in the Faith of Christ. Salutation to Marke who sent
his gold to Christ. Salutation to the idolater Guespar, and also to the men of his house who
believed through this great miracle.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 04
(April 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the saints Victor, and Decius, and Irene, and many people, both men, and
women, and virgins became martyrs. These saints lived in the days of the kingdom of
Constantine, and in the days of his son; now these emperors destroyed many houses of
idols, and broke their idols, and burned them in the fire, and they built [on the sites of the
temples] many churches and altars, in the name of our Lady, the Holy Virgin Mary, the
God-bearer, and in the names of many saints. When Constantine was dead Julian the
infidel reigned, and he set up the worship of idols, and he honored their priests, and slew
many Christians. And the history of these saints was noised abroad, how they worked
[destruction] in the houses of the idols, and how they smashed the idols. Then the
governor seized them, and tortured them for many days, and beat them, and crucified them,
and flayed the skin from their bodies with iron knives; and after this [the soldiers] cut off
their heads with swords, and they received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. Salutation to Victor, and Decius, and ‘Ermo.
Salutation to the holy father, Isaac the abbot.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 05
(April 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great prophet, the righteous man, Ezekiel, the son of Buz, the priest,
who was made captive, and carried off to the city of Babylon. When Nebuchadnezzar
carried the children of Israel into captivity, the spirit of prophecy descended upon Ezekiel
when he was in the land of Babylon, and in prophecy he spoke many marvelous words. In
prophecy he spoke concerning the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ by our Lady, the holy
Virgin Mary, and how after she had borne Him, she would remain a virgin. And he
prophesied, saying, “I saw in the East a door which was shut. And God said unto me, this
448

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
door shall remain shut, and it shall not be opened, and none shall go through it except the
Lord God of Israel, and He shall go in and out from it.” And he prophesied concerning the
baptism of Christ, [saying], “The soul of a man shall be sanctified, and his body, and the
heart of stone shall be plucked out from him, and he shall become a Son of God by the
descent of the Holy Spirit upon him” (Ezekiel xxxvi, 26). And he encouraged the people
and rebuked the priests for forsaking the teaching of the people, and he said unto them,
“Guard yourselves against laziness, and be not blind to doctrine.” And he rebuked them
and said unto them, “God will require the souls of men from you if ye do not teach them
and if ye do not wake them up.” And he prophesied concerning the resurrection of bodies,
[saying], “Needs must that dead bodies shall rise, and they shall become one with their
souls even as they were aforetime. And they shall rise up according to what is prepared for
them, whether it be for punishment or whether it be for joy.” And he uttered many
prophecies, which are of benefit to those who read them, and God made manifest through
him many signs and wonders. When the children of Israel worshipped idols in the city of
Babylon, he rebuked them, and because of this their leaders rose up and killed him. And
he prophesied five hundred and seventy and seven years before the Incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the days of his prophesying were one year. Salutation to Ezekiel, who
saw Mary as a closed door, which God had established.
And on this day also took place the strife of ‘Aflamis, and Theodora, and Arsenius, the
monk, and Basilides.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 06
(April 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Mary, the Egyptian, the dweller in the desert. This holy woman was
a native of Egypt, and she came from the city of Alexandria, and her parents were
Christians. When her days were twelve years, the Hater of good and the Adversary of men
seduced her, and led her astray and made her his net wherein he caught innumerable souls,
that is to say Satan made her to love fornication. And she gave her body up to fornication,
without payment, because of her love for the deadly sin, and she continued in this filthy
work for a period of seven and twenty years; and her love for this filthy work increased
[with her years]. And by the Will of God, the Lover of mankind, He showed her the men
who wished to go and be blessed at the tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ in the city of
Jerusalem, and the thought stirred in her mind that she would go with them; and she
embarked in a ship, with many people. When they were about to set sail, the sailors said
unto her, “Give us the passage money for the ship,” and as she had not the money with her
to give them, she gave them her body so that they might take fornication with her in place
of the ship’s passage money. When she arrived in Jerusalem, she did the same thing, and
played the whore continually. When she wished to go in with the rest of the people
through the door of the church of the tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Divine Power
prevented her from entering. And it came to pass that when she wished [to fornicate] with
the people who were coming [there] the Power of God prevented her from doing so. And
449

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
when she drew nigh, and the Power prevented her from entering the church because of her
filthy deeds, she lifted up her eyes to heaven, to God the Merciful, being sad and sorrowful
in her heart, and she saw above her a picture of our Lady, the holy Virgin Mary, the Godbearer. And she wept before it, and made entreaty unto it, saying, “O intercessor for all
Christian people, O God-bearer, make a pact with me. If I can go in and celebrate the
festival with all the [other] people, I will do everything which thou commandest me.” And
saying these words she went quickly into the church of the tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And when she had finished the keeping of the feast, she returned quickly to the picture of
our Lady the holy Virgin Mary, the God-bearer; and she made long prayers before it, and
wept bitterly, and made entreaties before it that the Virgin would send her where ever she
pleased, so that she might save her soul. And a voice came out from the picture of our
Lady, the holy Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, saying, “If thou wilt go into the desert of the
Jordan thou wilt find rest and salvation.” And she accepted the words, and prayed and
saluted the picture of our Lady, the holy Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, and then she went
forth. When she had gone forth from the church she met a certain man, and he gave her
three small coins wherewith she bought bread. Then she crossed the valley (or, river) of
the Jordan, and dwelt in the desert of the Jordan for seven and forty years; and she strove
strenuously, and Satan fought against her by means of her love for the impure thing, which
she had worked formerly. And she lived upon the bread, which she had bought for many
days, and every two days she used to fast for two days, and every three days for three days,
and little by little she ate up her bread. When the bread was finished she lived upon the
herbs in the desert. When the seven and forty years wherein she had wandered up and
down the desert had come to an end, the holy priest Zozimas went out into the desert of the
Jordan, in order to complete therein the holy Forty Days’ Fast, according to the custom
observed in his monastery--now it was the custom with the monks of his monastery to go
out each year for the Great Fast (i.e. Lent) into the desert, and to devote themselves to
severe ascetic labors, and to fight in the spirit until the end of the Fast. When Saint
Zozimas had gone out into the desert of the Jordan, he entreated God to show him, that
which would give him consolation. As he was going along in the desert he saw the holy
woman Mary in the distance, and he believed her to be Satan himself. And having prayed,
it was shown to him that she was a human being, and he went towards her, and she fled
from him; and he followed her and ran after her to come up to her, but she still fled from
him. Then she called out to him by his name, saying, “O Zozimas, why dost thou want to
talk to me; throw me a rag that I may cover myself therewith, for I am naked.” And he
marveled exceedingly when she called him by his name, and he threw to her the
wherewithal to cover herself; and straightway she came to him and bowed before him, and
he bowed before her, and they embraced each other, and she asked him to pray for her, for
he was a priest. Then he asked her to tell him the story of her fight, and then she told him
everything, which had happened to her from the beginning to the end. Then she asked him
to come and visit her each year, and to bring with him the Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and he said unto her, “I will.” When a full year had passed he took some of
the holy Body, and the honorable Blood in a cup, and he carried with him figs, and dates,
and also lentils for soaking in water. And he came to the bank of the River Jordan, and
saw the holy woman coming in the distance, and she was walking towards the River
Jordan; and when she came up to him they embraced each other and prayed. Then he
administered to her the Holy Mysteries, and he brought forth the dates, and the figs, and
the lentils, and asked her to accept them from him; but she asked him to come back to her
in the desert in the following year. When the second year was ended, and he went to the
450

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
valley of the Jordan, he found that the holy woman was dead, and lying near her head was
a paper whereon was written, “Bury Mary, the poor woman, in the dust of which she was
created”; and he marveled at the writing. And he saw near her feet a lion, which was
guarding her, and whilst he was wondering in his mind with what he should dig her grave,
the lion came and dug a grave for her; then the holy man prayed over her and buried her.
And he returned to his monastery and related to the monks the story of the strife of this
holy woman Mary the Egyptian from the beginning to the end thereof, even as she had told
it to him; and they all marveled exceedingly, and they praised the glorious and Most High
God. And all the days of her life were seven and seventy years. Salutation to Mary, whose
dead body was guarded by a lion in the desert.
And on this day our Lord Jesus Christ appeared to Thomas, the apostle, on the eighth day
after His resurrection. And Thomas saw the marks of the nails which were in His hands
and feet, and he took his hands and laid them in His Divine side, where the spear had
pierced it, and he said, “My Lord and my God.” And our Lord said unto him, “Thou hast
believed on Me, because thou hast seen Me; blessed is he who shall believe on Me without
seeing Me.” In a commentary on the Gospel it saith that when Thomas the apostle laid his
hand in our Lord’s side, his hand was burnt with divine fire; and that when he believed in
His Godhead his hand was healed of the burn. Glory be to God, and let us beseech Him to
have mercy upon us through the prayers of all His holy apostles and righteous ones,
forever and ever. Amen. Salutation to the chamber wherein Christ showed His pierced
side, and the hand of Thomas was burnt.
And the fathers have commanded us to celebrate the commemoration of the deaths of our
father Adam and our mother Eve on this day. Before God created this our father Adam He
created the heavens and the earth and all that therein is, and the angels and the archangels.
And having planted for him the Garden of Edom containing every kind of fruit pleasant to
the taste, and having furnished it with every desirable thing, He created Adam. He took
dust from the centre of the earth, that is to say Golgotha, at the third hour of the day of the
Eve of the Sabbath (Friday), and He created him out of four things, that is to say, water,
fire, air, and dust. And He made him in His own image and likeness, and He breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life, and He dressed him in the dress of life, and light, and He
made him king, and priest, and prophet, and administrator of everything he wished. Then
He brought to him all the beasts, and cattle, and birds of the heavens so that Adam might
see them, [and give unto] each of them its name, even as he pronounced them, through the
Holy Spirit, which was on him. And God having wished to make for him a companion to
help him, brought upon him slumber, and he slept, and then He took a bone from his side
and filled [the place thereof] with flesh, and set her before him. When Adam woke from
his sleep he prophesied, and said, “Bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh, assuredly thou
be to me my wife”; and he called her name “Hewan” (Eve). And as Adam was standing
[there] on the place of Golgotha, he heard the voice of his God, and behold a cloud of light
took him up with Eve his wife and carried them into the Garden of Edom, and the voices of
every rank of the angels, the Cherubim and the Seraphim, went before him praising and
thanking God because He had done honor to Adam. And God said unto Adam and Eve,
“Of every tree which is in the Garden eat, but of the tree which is in the middle of the
Garden eat not, for on the day wherein ye shall eat of it ye shall surely die.” And Adam
continued to till the Garden, and to eat of the fruit thereof, and he praised [God] with the
angels. And when Satan, the Enemy of all good, had fallen from his exalted state and
honor, because of his arrogance concerning Adam, and the honor and glory [which God
451

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
had given him], he went to the place where Eve was, in the form of a serpent, and he
persuaded her to eat of that tree which God had set apart, and promised to her the nature of
God [if she did so]. And having looked at the tree, and seen that the fruit thereof was
good, she ate thereof, and made Adam to eat thereof. And their raiment of light was
stripped from them, and they knew that they were naked, and they covered their shame
with the leaves of the fig tree. And when God knew their fault, He cursed the serpent, and
He made enmity to exist between it and the seed of Eve. And her also He cursed, saying,
“In pain conceive and bring forth thy children; and thy turning shall be to thy husband, and
he shall serve thee.” And to Adam He said, “Cursed shall the ground be for thy sake.
With the sweat of thy face eat thy bread; dust thou art and to dust thou shalt return.” And
he made for them tunics of hide, and they put them on, and they went forth from the
Garden of Edom, at the turn of the evening, after seven years of joy and delight. In the
morning, at sunrise, he used to smell the smell of incense, and perfume, and water of
frankincense, and aromatic herbs. And Adam dwelt in the land of Elda and tilled the
ground according to what he had learned in the Garden of Edom, and he knew his wife Eve
and she bore him Kayl (Cain) and after him Abel. When Kayl (Cain) slew Abel in his
jealousy. And Adam continued to lament the death of his son for seven (?) years, and then
Seth was born unto him in exchange for Abel his son, in whom stood his memorial, and
after him came many children (?). When Adam went forth from the Garden, God saw his
tears and his repentance, and He gave him the promise of a hope of salvation, and He said
unto him, “In five thousand and five years I will come into the world, and I will be born of
what is in thee, and I will deliver thee in a wide place, and I will redeem thee by My
Cross.” And Adam took from the Garden gold, and myrrh, and incense, and gave them to
his son Seth, and he wrote for him, saying, “In the last days the Son of God shall come,
and He shall be born of a virgin, and then the Magi shall bring (as) gifts unto Him this
gold, and myrrh, and incense.” And this writing after begin handed down from generation
to generation came to our Lady, the holy Virgin Mary, and she gave it to our father Peter,
and Peter gave it to Clement. When our father Adam knew his death was near he called
his son Seth, and Seth drew nigh unto him in the Cave of Treasures. And Adam said unto
him, “Make thy children and thy children’s children to come unto me before I die.” When
Seth heard the words of his father Adam, he went forth from his presence, with the tears
flowing down his cheeks, and he gathered together his children, and his children’s
children, and brought them to him. When Adam saw them he wept because of his
[approaching] separation from them, and when they saw him weeping they all wept
together before God, and they fell down upon their faces, saying, “How can the earth cover
thee, and hide thee from our eyes?” Then our father Adam blessed all his children, and he
said unto Seth, “O my son, this world is full of weariness; preserve righteousness and
purity; let us trust in God. And incline not to the voice of Satan, and his wiles, which he
will make apparent to thee. When I die take my body, and prepare it for burial with myrrh
and cassia and stacte, and bury me in the cave of a store-chamber. And there shall come a
water-flood, and it shall drown every created thing, and only eight souls shall be left. Be
thou a protector of thy people. Watch over them and protect them in the fear of God, and
teach them the way of salvation, and take care of them so that they may not be in
subjection to Satan, and that he may not destroy them. Separate thy children and thy
children’s children from the children of Kayl (Cain), and do not let them mix in any way,
and they shall draw nigh neither to their works nor their fables.” Then Adam turned to
Seth his son, and to Eve his wife, and he confided to their care the gold, and the myrrh, and
the cassia, so that they might bury them with him. And he said unto them, “In the days
452

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
wherein the Water-flood shall come, they shall take my body into the ark, with the gold,
and the myrrh, and the cassia, and shall lay them in the middle of the earth. After many
days [enemies] shall capture this country, and they shall [not] take the gold, and the myrrh,
and the cassia, together with the [other] spoil, but they shall be preserved here until the
time when the Word of God shall become flesh, when kings shall take them and bring
them unto Him--gold because of His kingship, and incense because He is God of heaven
and earth, and the myrrh is the symbol of His Passion.” And when Adam was nine
hundred the thirty years old (Genesis v, 5), in the 135th year of the life of Mahalaleel, he
died, at the ninth hour of the day, on Friday, the day on which he was created, now the
hour in which he died was that in which his going forth from Paradise had taken place; at
that moment hosts of angels gathered together to his children. And they prepared his body
for burial carefully, and they anointed him with scented unguents of every kind, which are
[found] in the trees of the Holy Mountain. And they laid his body facing the east of the
Cave, and they set a lighted lamp before him, and they laid by his side the gold, and the
myrrh, and the cassia; and they sealed the doors of the Cave with the seals of Adam and
Eve and Seth. And Seth and his children continued to minister unto the body of our father
Adam, until the Water-flood came. Then Noah took Adam’s body into the ark, and by the
command of God he carried it with him until he brought it to Mount Ararat. Then Shem
and Melchisedek, an angel of the Lord guiding them, took it from this place and buried it
in the “place of a skull”; and Melchisedek continued to minister unto it with incense and
offerings. And when the Son of God came, and was born of Adam’s daughter, He
redeemed Adam by His death, and restored him to his former inheritance, for he was the
father of the prophets and apostles, and the father of the saints and martyrs, and through
him the Son of God came into the world. Salutation to Adam, the first man created, and
salutation to Eve, a bone of him.
And on this day were born Noah and David, the king, the father of Solomon.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 07
(April 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great and honored and righteous man, Joachim, the father of our Lady,
the holy Virgin Mary, the God-bearer. This righteous man was called by three names,
which are as follows: Joachim, and Yonakir, and Zadok. He was of the seed of David,
and of the tribe of Judah, for he was the son of Joachim, the son of Lazarus, the son of
Eldad, whose tribe goeth back to Solomon the king, the son of David the king, whom God
promised that his seed should reign over the children of Israel for ever. The wife of this
righteous man was Hannah, and she was barren, and both of them prayed and entreated
God continually, by day and by night, [to give them children]. And having accepted their
petition He gave them good fruit, and sweet, which satisfied all the men of the world, and
He removed from them the bitterness of servitude, and He made Joachim worthy to be
called the father or Christ, because of His marvelous Incarnation, which was to take place
through his daughter. And after God had shown His joy in the birth of our Lady, the holy
453

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, his heart was glad, and he brought his offering to the altar,
for shame had been removed from him, and from his kinsfolk. And after our Lady, the
holy Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, had left her mother’s breast, Joachim took her and
carried her into the sanctuary of God, according to what they had vowed to God. And
having lived a few days after he died in peace. Salutation to Joachim.
And on this day also are commemorated ‘Agabos, and Theodora, the martyrs, and Abba
Metruf, the son of Abba Muse of Dabra Lebyon. Salutation to ‘Agabos, Theodora, and
Metruf.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 08
(April 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became martyrs the three holy women, that is to say, ‘Agali, and ‘Erani, and
Susnonya. These three holy virgins were natives of the city of Thessalonica, and they
served God and our Lord Jesus Christ, for their parents were God-fearing folk. And the
three women loved virginity and chastity, and they made an agreement with each other to
serve Christ, and they devoted themselves to the ascetic life, and they fought a great and
good fight, which exceeded the strength of their youth and capacity. And they fasted, and
prayed, and kept vigil ceaselessly at all times, and they went to the nunneries, and
associated themselves with the virgins who were therein. When Maximianus, the infidel,
reigned, he established the worship of idols, and poured out the blood of very many
innocent persons. And those virgins were afraid, and they fled to a mountain and hid
themselves in a cave, and they dwelt therein, and devoted themselves to the practices and
contending of the ascetic life. And a certain old woman, who was a Christian, used to visit
them once a week, and to give them everything, which they needed, and she sold the
things, which they made with their hands, and what remained of the price thereof she gave
to the poor. And it fell out that as she used to come out of the city, and go to the mountain
very often, a certain evil man saw her [one day], and he followed her, secretly, and at a
distance, without the old woman seeing him, until she came to the cave and went inside it.
And the man watched her going into the cave from a distance, and hid himself until she
came out; now he imagined that there was money hidden in the cave. And when the old
woman had gone away from that place, that evil man went into the cave, and he found
those pearls of great price, those lambs of the flock of Christ, praying. When they stood up
he bound them with fetters, and he dragged them away, and brought them to the governor
of Thessalonica. And when the governor questioned them about their Faith, they
confessed before him that they were Christians, and that they worshipped the God Who
had been crucified for them; and he was wroth with them because of the power of the word
of Faith, and he commanded [his soldiers] to beat them severely, and to make the stripes to
cause them grievous pain. And when they would not submit to him, and would not
become infidels, he commanded his soldiers to cast them into the fire; and they bound the
virgins with fetters, and cast them into the fire. And they delivered up their souls therein,
and each received an incorruptible crown in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to the
454

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
three virgins who were burned to death in the fire, and two-fold salutation to the old widow
who supplied their daily needs.
And on this day also one hundred and fifty people were martyred at once by a Persian
king. This king besieged a certain Christian city, which was near his own land, and he
carried off as captives very many of the people thereof and took them to his own country.
When they refused to obey him, and would not worship the sun, and moon, and stars, he
commanded [his soldiers] to cut off their heads, and they cut them off with swords, and
[each of the captives] received a crown of martyrdom. Salutation to you, O ye one
hundred and fifty martyrs who refused to worship the gods of the King of Persia, and were
burned to death (sic) in the fire.
And on this day also is commemorated Timothy, the archbishop.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 09
(April 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, the ascetic and fighter, the priest Abba Zozimas the
monk. This holy man was a native of the country of Palestine, and his parents were
Christians and righteous folk. And having begotten this holy man they themselves brought
him up for five years, and then they gave him to a certain righteous elder monk to educate
and to train thoroughly as a Christian, and to teach him philosophy, and the doctrine of the
Church; and the elder received him and treated him like a son in Christ. And he taught him
philosophy of every kind, and doctrine, and after this he arrayed him in the garb of the
monk, and made him a deacon. And he grew up doing good works, and he increased in
excellence, and he was continually praising God, and he read the Scriptures by day and by
night. And whether he was working with his hands, or whether he was eating his food, he
never ceased from praising God at all times. When he had completed five and forty years
in that monastery, he was made a priest, and he increased his ascetic labors and his
contending, and he became the conqueror in every spiritual fight. And the Enemy and
Adversary sowed in his heart the evil thought that he was superior by far in respect of
severity of his labors to all the other ascetics his contemporaries. And he said within his
soul, “Doth there remain for me to do one work of righteousness and asceticism which I
have not done?” And our Lord Jesus Christ did not abandon him, but He sent an angel to
him, and commanded him to go to that monastery which was near the River Jordan. And
he rose up and departed, and he came to that monastery, and he found therein righteous
elders who were perfect in their contending, and he knew that his ascetic labors were less
strenuous than theirs, and that there lived in the world men who were more perfect and
better than he. And he took up his abode with them in that monastery, and he fought as
they fought with them for many years. And the monks of that monastery were
accustomed, when the Great Fast of forty days came, to fast in the monastery for the first
week of the Holy Fast, and to receive the Holy Mysteries on the First Day of the week.
And on the following day they went out from the monastery singing the 27th Psalm, “The
455

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear?” to the end. When they had finished
their coming forth from the monastery, they prayed at the gates of the monastery, and
embraced each other, and the abbot of the monastery blessed them, and then they dispersed
themselves in the desert, and each of them carried out his spiritual fight by himself, unseen
by his companions. And if one of them saw that a companion was near him, he fled to
another spot, so that he might not see the face of his neighbor. And Saint Zozimas used to
go out with them each year, and he would wander up and down in the desert, and ask God
to reveal to him something, which would give him comfort. As he was wandering about
he found Mary, the Egyptian woman was dwelt in the desert, and he learned from her the
manner of the life which she had lived in the world in the days of her youth, and how it
came to pass that she entered that desert; and she told him everything which had happened
to her, and all her fight from the beginning to the end thereof. Then she asked him to visit
her. After one year [he came to her] and gave her the Mysteries. After this, in the second
year, he visited the desert, and found that she was dead; and he buried her, and he told the
monks of that monastery concerning her strife. This holy man found it meet to go to the
“Country of the Blessed,” and it is he who wrote the account of the dwellers there, and
their strivings, and revealed their works, and their righteousness. When he had completed
eight and ninety years, he died in peace. Of these he lived [five and] forty years in the
world before he entered the monastery, and for three and fifty years he lived the life of an
ascetic, and fought the spiritual fight. Salutation to Zozimas who visited the Country of
the Blessed like Matthew, and described the lives of those who lived there.
And on this day also the righteous men of the company of Isidore, and a child ten months
old, together with his father and mother, became martyrs.
And on this day also there was made manifest a great miracle through our holy father Abba
Sinuthius (Shenuti), Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This man had gone up into the
desert of Scete in order to fast the Great Fast in the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius with
the monks. And when it was [the time for] the Eight Hosannas, the Arabs and Muslims
assembled, and came to the desert of Scete to plunder the desert houses and monasteries,
and they stood on the rock to the east of the church of Saint Macarius, and their swords
were drawn in their hands, ready to kill men. And the bishops, [and the priests,] and the
monks gathered together to him, and they told him what had taken place with the Arabs
and Muslims, and they wanted to go forth from the desert before the festival of Easter.
And Sinuthius (Shenuti) said unto them, “As for me, I will not leave the desert until the
festival of Easter be finished.” And when the Fifth Day of the week had come whereon,
according to the New Covenant of Joy, our Lord Christ washed the feet of His disciples,
the number of the Muslims and the Arabs increased. When Abba Sinuthius (Shenuti) saw
the terror of the people, he took up his staff whereon was the figure of the Cross, and he
grasped it and willed to go forth to them, saying, “It is better for me to die with the people
of God.” And the bishops and the monks seized him, and would not let him go out, and he
strengthened their hearts and comforted them. Then he went forth to the Arabs and the
Muslims, with his staff in his hand, and when the Muslims saw him they turned round and
fled as if they were pursued by an army of soldiers; and from that day onwards those
Muslims never came back to the monks and never did them any harm. Salutation to
Archbishop Sinuthius (Shenuti), who put to flight Arabs, who were armed with swords, by
the figure of the Cross only.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
456

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 10
(April 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father and fighter Abba Isaac, the disciple of the great father
Abba ‘Eblo. This holy man renounced the world and all the pleasure and delight thereof,
and went up to the desert of Scete, and became a monk; he was the disciple of Abba ‘Eblo,
and he continued to minister unto him for five and twenty years. And he fought so
strenuous a fight that at length his whole body dried up, but he retained possession of all
his faculties. And he remained quiet (or, silent) at the times of prayer and the consecration
of the Offering, and he stood timidly [in the church] with his hands clasped behind him,
and his head bent; and he wept until the Office of the Offering was ended. And when he
came out from the Offering, he never associated with any man at all during that day, and
he never left the door of his house open lest any man should come and visit him. And
when anyone asked him, saying, “Why dost thou never talk with him who wisheth to talk
with thee at the time of prayer, and at the time of the Offering?” he answered and said unto
him, “There is a time for everything, as is fitting.” And when the time of his death drew
nigh the company of the monks gathered together to him so that they might be blessed by
him, and might take refuge in his prayer. And when they asked him, and said unto him,
“Why didst thou flee from men?” he answered and said, “I was not fleeing from men but
from Satan. If a man taketh hold of lighted lamp, and standeth in the wind, will not the
light be extinguished? Even so is it with us when our hearts shine at the time of prayer and
at the time of the Offering. When we meet together and hold converse with each other our
hearts become dark.” And this holy man having finished his spiritual strife and pleased
God by his strife, and God having willed to give him rest from the toil of this fleeting
world, he became a little sick and died in peace. Salutation to Isaac who loved ascetic
labors and prayer, and fled from the face of a man, as from a wild beast.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Gabriel, the seventieth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria, who was named the “son of Taroyka.” This holy man was a son of one
of the rich nobles of Mesr (Cairo), and he was appointed deacon in the church of Saint
Mercorius of Egypt. He was a wise and learned writer, and he wrote many books in Coptic
and Arabic with his own hand, and he completed the greater part of them, and he
interpreted (or, translated) many others; and the bishops, and those who were in authority,
and the elders of the people chose him to be appointed archbishop. And there was in the
desert of Scete a certain elder, a Syrian, and a man of the Spirit, whose name was Abba
Yosef, and the grace of God was upon him, and he could see by the Holy Spirit, and
describe what was about to take place before it happened. And the aged monks gathered
together to him, and asked him to make them to know, and reveal to them the answer to
their enquiry, “Who is the best man for this honorable office?” And Yosef answered and
said unto them, “A certain man who is called Gabriel, the son of Taroyka”; and the monks
told this answer to the bishops. And they all were pleased with it, and they agreed about
him, and they seized him and enthroned him archbishop on the 21st day of the month of
Yekatit, in the year of mercy, the eight hundred and fortieth year [of the Era] of the martyrs
(i.e. A.D. 1124). And when he departed to the desert of Scete, he added in the prayer of
the Creed, which is at the end of the Liturgy of Basil, the words, “and was One with His
Godhead.” And the monks of the desert of Scete said unto him, “This is not our custom.”
457

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
They were afraid that he thought that Christ was . . . and that His Godhead was mingled
with His manhood. And after a great searching out, these words were sanctioned, and
what followeth: “without separation, and without mixture, and without blending”; and
they were well received and are in the Creed to this day. And this father in his days
ordained very many good things, and he cursed the people who brought the bodies of the
dead into the inner parts of the churches of Mesr (Cairo), and he cursed all those who had
concubines and cast them forth from their houses, and drove them away. And this father
drew up a Canon, and laid down just laws concerning inheritances from dead men, and
other matters, and these ordinances are observed by the Church from many books. During
the days of his rule he appointed three and fifty bishops, and many priests, and he never
took a dirham from them. And at that time the King of Egypt brought tribulation upon
him, and demanded money from him by force, and he set seventy spies over him to watch
him. And the scribes, and the men in authority, and the people, knowing that this father
had neither taken any money from any man, nor from the moneys of the Church, nor from
the [rents of] the lands of the poor, they collected from their own houses three hundred
dinars in gold and gave them to the king on his behalf. And as the time of his death drew
nigh, and God willed to make manifest his righteousness and virtues, he became a little
sick. And he saw in a vision many priests and monks coming to him, carrying in their
hands crosses, and censers, and Books of the Gospel, and they embraced him, and said
unto him, “We have come unto thee to visit thee, but we will return unto thee after this
earth is ended [for thee], and we will take thee with us.” When he awoke he told the
bishops and the priests who were about him what he had seen, and then he recovered from
his illness. And after the end of a year he became a little sick, and again he saw the priests
and the monks who had come to him formerly, and they embraced him and he rejoiced
with them. And straightway he delivered his soul into the hand of God, and he died in
peace; and all the days of his sitting upon the throne of Mark the evangelist were fourteen
years. And in the days of this father the King of Ethiopia commanded Abba Michael,
saying, “Set a bishop over the country of Ethiopia”; and the bishop said unto the king, “I
cannot appoint another bishop without the command of the archbishop.” And the King of
Ethiopia sent a letter to this father Abba Gabriel the archbishop, asking him concerning
this matter, and he also sent a letter to the King of Egypt asking him to command this
father [to appoint a bishop]. And this father commanded Abba Michael, Bishop of
Ethiopia, to appoint for him other bishops over and above those, which had been already
appointed. And the King of Mesr (Cairo) commanded this father Abba Gabriel to
command Abba Michael, Bishop of Ethiopia, to do everything that the King of Ethiopia
wished. And the nobles came in to the King of Mesr (Cairo), and they said unto him, “If
bishops become many in the country of Ethiopia they will wax bold, and they will appoint
bishops as they please, and they will never return to thee at all.” When the King of Mesr
(Cairo) heard this, he commanded this father archbishop, Abba Gabriel, saying, “Send a
letter and curse the King of Ethiopia, so that henceforward he may not appoint bishops
over the country of Ethiopia”; and the archbishop sent a letter as the King of Egypt
commanded him. When that letter reached the King of Ethiopia, suddenly his palace
caught fire, and famine and plague broke out in his land, and the rain was held back, and
would not fall on the fields, and great tribulation came upon the people, for the king
refused [to obey]; and he transgressed the command of God. Then the King of Ethiopia
turned to God and repented, and he sent a letter to the King of Mesr (Cairo) asking him to
command this father to send, and release him from this ban. And this father wrote a letter
of blessing, and sent it to the King of Ethiopia, and to all the Ethiopians, and blessed them.
458

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
When that letter reached the country of Ethiopia God removed His anger from them and
sent to them His compassion and mercy; and the rain descended upon them, and God
removed the famine and the plague and the people rejoiced with great joy. And this is
what happened in the days of that king. Salutation to the Patriarch, the son of Torayk, to
whose name was added that of the angel Gabriel.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 11
(April 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Simon, a native of the country of Armenia, and Bishop of the country of
Persia, became a martyr; and with him were one hundred and fifty others who suffered.
This holy man lived in the reign of Sapor, the son of Hormizd, who was called, “puller out
of the arms,” because when he conquered another king he bound him in fetters, and pulled
out his arms. And he inflicted very severe tribulation upon the believers, and he laid
forced labor upon them. And this holy man sent to him a letter wherein he said, “Those
whom our Lord Jesus Christ hath bought with His honorable Blood are to be saved from
the servitude of men, and they are the servants of our Lord Jesus Christ alone. Therefore
forced labor doth not befit them, and they are not liable to render the illegal and excessive
labor and tribute, which may be decreed for them. But they may choose to die for our Lord
Jesus Christ, Who hath shed His blood for them, and may not perform service for the
wicked men who transgress the Law.” When Sapor had read the letter of this holy man, he
was exceedingly wroth, and he bound him with two chains of iron, and brought him and
cast him into the prison house, where the holy man found many men who denied Christ
and worshipped the sun; but these men were bound for other reasons. And the saint
rebuked them, and taught them, and they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ; and the
soldiers cut off their heads, and they received crowns of martyrdom. After this the king
had this holy man brought, and there were with him one hundred and fifty men, and the
holy man strengthened them until they cut off their heads and they received crowns of
martyrdom. And one of these men was terrified, and he dreaded the sword, and he wished
to deny his Faith; but one of those who were standing there said unto him, “Be not terrified
at the stroke of the sword, which is as nothing, but shut thine eyes and thou shalt be
numbered with the martyrs, and thou shalt reign with our Lord Jesus Christ for ever.” And
he did thus, and he received a crown of martyrdom. Then certain men informed against
that man who had encouraged the other, now his name was Basek, and they brought him to
the king, and the king cut out his tongue and flayed him, and Basek yielded up his soul.
After this he had Saint Simon brought to him, and he said unto him, “Worship the gods. If
thou wilt not do so I will torture thee severely”; and the saint would not obey his
command, and he was not afraid of his torture. And straightway the king commanded his
soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, [and they did so,] and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And all the days of his life were one hundred and
twenty years. Salutation to Simon the Armenian, Bishop of Persia, and salutation to the one
hundred and fifty men who suffered with him, and inherited the kingdom of heaven with him.

Glory

be

to

God

Who

is

glorified

in

His

Saints.

Amen.
459

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 12
(April 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Alexander, Bishop of the city of Jerusalem. This
holy man was Bishop of the country of Cappadocia, and he came to the city of Jerusalem
in order to worship therein, and to receive a blessing through the holy places, and then [he
intended] to return to his own country. And there was in Jerusalem a bishop, a righteous
man, whose name was Barkisis; he was very far advanced in age, and had reached his
110th year; for a long time he had wished to retire from his see, but the people would not
let him do so. When Saint Alexander had finished his work, and wanted to return to his
country of Cappadocia, God made the men of Jerusalem to hear a voice from heaven,
which said unto them, “Get ye out to the gate, and the first man who cometh in seize, and
set him over you as bishop.” And the men went out to the gate of the city, and they found
Abba Alexander, and they seized him and brought him in, and the bishop said unto them,
“I am Bishop of the country of Cappadocia, and I cannot leave my flock to which Christ
hath appointed me [to become bishop] over you. And I see other [reasons]. Behold my
diocese is reckoned unto me as a wife, and it is not right for me to forsake it.” Then they
told him about the voice which they had heard from heaven, and what it had said unto
them about him. And when he knew that the matter was according to the Will of God, and
the fathers who were assembled for the festival had advised him to do so, he accepted their
words, and he wrote a letter to his own country saying to the people thereof, even as he
wrote about it, “Forgive me. Sorrow not for me. Appoint a bishop for yourselves in my
place. And do ye rejoice.” And he sent that letter with certain Cappadocian men who had
been with him for the festival. Then this Alexander sat with Barkisis, the elder, for a period
of five years, and more, and the holy father Barkisis, the elder, died; and Alexander took
over his flock in the city of Jerusalem, and he shepherded the people and gave them
spiritual protection, even as did the apostles. And Maximus, the infidel governor, seized
him, and he inflicted upon him severe tortures of every kind, and then he shut him up in
prison until he could decide what to do with him. And God blotted out that wicked
governor quickly, and brought out this father from the prison house. When Gordianus
became emperor there was quietness, and for a short time he removed tribulation from the
Christians. After this he died, and Philip reigned in his stead; now Philip was a believer
and he believed on the Lord Jesus Christ. And he set free from the prisons all the believers
who had been shut up therein for the Name of Christ, and he paid them great honor. And
this father sat in quietness and peace until Decius rose and killed Philip, and reigned in his
stead; and he afflicted the Christians exceedingly. And he seized this father and many of
the elders of the Church, and inflicted punishments of every kind upon them, but especially
upon this father, whom he beat cruelly and unmercifully with staves, to which sharp irons
pierced his belly. Then he commanded [the soldiers] to drag him by his feet to the prison
house, and to throw him in there; and they did even as the emperor commanded. And
Alexander lay prostrate in the prison house, but believing on our Lord Christ, and he
delivered up his soul into the hand of God, and inherited the kingdom of the heavens,
which is prepared for the saints of God. Salutation to Alexander who was beaten to death,
and to Antonius, and Luke.

460

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day God sent Michael the archangel to Jeremiah the prophet, and delivered
him from the narrow prison wherein Zedekiah the king had imprisoned him, and Abimelek
the Ethiopian, the captain of the royal guard brought him out. And Straightway Jeremiah
blessed him, and he (the angel) told him that he should neither see the desolation of
Jerusalem, nor taste the bitterness of captivity and calamity; and this actually came to pass
for him. And he fell asleep for seven and sixty years, and with Michael were wine, and
figs, and he gave [them] to Jeremiah the prophet. And for this reason the doctors of the
Church have commanded us to make a festival in honor of the glorious Archangel Michael
on the twelfth day of each month. Salutation to Michael, the angel of the covenant of God,
and helper of all who are on land and sea, like whom there is no other.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Anthony, Bishop of the city of Tamaw, and
Eusanius (Ausanius).
And on this day also are commemorated Gaius (Fugasyos), and Esdras unto whom John
the Baptist appeared.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 13
(April 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day two ascetics, Abba Iyasu (Joshua) and Abba Yosef (Joseph), the disciples of
Abba Milius in Dabra Kuerasan, became martyrs. And behold the story of their
martyrdom, and of their strife, is written in the section for the 28th day of this month,
which is the day whereon their spiritual father became a martyr. Salutation to Iyasu
(Joshua) and Yosef (Joseph) the chosen ones.
And on this day also is commemorated Dionysias the martyr, the deaconess, who was one
of the apostles, and whom the disciples of our Lord Christ appointed.
And on this day also is commemorated Banadleus (Madleyos) the martyr.
And on this day also are commemorated our father ‘Aklesotemos, and four monks.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

461

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 14
(April 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and spiritual father Abba Maximus, the fifteenth Archbishop of
the city of Alexandria. This father was a man who feared God in all his works, and he was
a native of the city of Alexandria. His parents were Orthodox Christians, and he learned to
read and write Greek, and studied Greek philosophy, and he had a very thorough and
perfect knowledge of the Greek tongue. Then he leaned the doctrine of the Church, and
the Law of God, and Abba ‘Arokla appointed him deacon over the church of the city of
Alexandria. Then Abba Dionysius made him a priest, and he became a devoted and
strenuous worker in every matter, which concerned the office to which he had been
appointed. When Abba Dionysius died, the learned fathers and bishops chose this father to
be archbishop, on the throne of Mark the evangelist, and by the Will of God, he was
appointed archbishop. Now Abba Dionysius died before the General Council of the city of
Antioch, which had assembled because of Paul of the city of Samosata, was ended. When
this father Maximus took his seat on the throne of his office, letters reached him from those
who were in authority at the Council describing what had happened at the Council, and
saying how the Council had excommunicated Paul of Samosata, the denier [of Christ], and
all those who believed his views. Before the arrival of these letters, however, in the
presence of the clergy of the city of Alexandria [Maximus had written a letter], and then he
wrote another letter, in his own name, and sent it with the letters of the Council to all the
countries in Egypt, and in the country of Ethiopia, and in the country of Nubians,
commanding thereby the people to pray, and make entreaty to God to remove from the
world the opinions and error of Paul of Samosata, the infidel. And God accepted their
petition, for that infidel Paul of Samosata only lived for a few days, and God blotted him
out speedily, and destroyed his evil belief in the world. In the days of this father there
appeared in the land of the east a man whose name was Mane. This man spread abroad
evil error, and he dared to call himself “Paraclete Holy Spirit.” And he came to the
country of Syria, and a certain bishop, whose name was Archelaus, contended with him in
words, and he prevailed over him and made manifest his error; and he drove him out of his
country and Mane returned to the land of Persia. Now he called himself a prophet. And
Behramo (Bahram), the King of Persia, took him, and cleaved him in twain, and he took
two hundred men who followed him and buried them in the ground head downwards up to
their loins, and he said, “Behold I have planted a garden of men.” And this father
continued to strive, and he shepherded his flock, and strengthened them in the True Faith
by means of rebukes and homilies; and he delivered them from tribulation of the infidels
and other evil men until he died. He sat upon the throne of Mark the Evangelist for
seventeen years, and he died in peace. Salutation of Maximus, the preacher of the Gospel.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

462

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 15
(April 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the first consecration of the church which was dedicated by
the Jacobite Christians in the country of Egypt, in the name of Saint Nicolas, Bishop of the
city of Mira, and one of the Three Hundred and Eighteen bishops and fathers who
assembled in the city of Nicea. This church which was consecrated was outside the city of
Alexandria, and it is well known by reason of the strife of Saint Abba Sinoda, and stands to
the east of the city. This holy man was exceedingly great, and he confessed Christ before
the government of Diocletian, and tribulation and many punishments came [upon him].
And God made him to remain until he came and joined himself to the holy General
Council of Three Hundred and Eighteen [bishops and fathers]. And the miracles of this
saint were exceedingly numerous, and they are known in all the ends of the earth.
Salutation to Saint Nicolas.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint ‘Agabos, the apostle, who was one of the
Twelve (Seventy-two disciples?), and whom the Book of the Acts of the Apostles (xi, 28;
xxi, 10) mentions as the man who prophesied as to what should come upon Paul. He it
was who also prophesied about the great famine which came in the days of Claudius
Caesar, and his prophecy was fulfilled and the famine came, and with it pestilence, and
destroyed many people. And behold we have already written an account of the strife of
this holy man in the section for the fourth day of the month of Yekatit. Salutation to
‘Agabos, who prophesied that the Jews would bind Paul hand and foot.
And on this day also [is commemorated] the departure of the soul of Saint John the Baptist,
after it had dwelt with him, and traveled about in the aether, for seventeen years.
Salutation to John whose soul left him when his head flew up into the air.
And on this day also is commemorated the holy woman Alexandra, the martyr, the wife of
Dudianus, the king, whom Saint George laughed at for casting incense to the gods. Now
Dudianus imagined that he was faithful, and he embraced the head of Saint George, and he
brought him into his royal palace. And Saint George prayed and read the Psalms of David
before Queen Alexandra, and she asked him to interpret them to her, and he interpreted
them and made clear to her the Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ; and his words entered
her heart, and she believed on the Lord Jesus Christ. And when Saint George had laughed
at Dudianus he destroyed his idols, and he commanded the earth, and it swallowed them
up, and Dudianus the king was put to shame. And he came to Saint Alexandra his wife in
sorrow and sadness, for Saint George had put him to shame. And this holy woman said
unto him, “Did I not tell thee not to set thyself against the Galilean Christians, because
their God is strong and powerful?” And Dudianus was wroth with her, and he commanded
the soldiers to torture her and to cut off her head; and they tortured her severely, and cut
off her head with a sword, and she received the incorruptible crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Alexandra, whose subjects tortured her, and laid a
heavy stone upon her breasts.
Salutation to ‘Abib.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
463

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 16
(April 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint ‘Antibas (Antipas), Bishop of the city of Bar’ama (Pergamus), the
disciple of John the Evangelist, the proclaimer of the Godhead, became a martyr. This
holy man lived in the days of Domitianus, the son of Vespasianus, who laid waste
Jerusalem. This Caesar destroyed the Jews who were in his dominions so completely, that
not a Jew could be found therein, and he killed many royal children also, being afraid for
his son, and his kingdom, and himself. And he heard that the Christians said that Christ
was their God and King, and he was afraid and slew many of the believers, and John the
Evangelist, that is to say, “preacher,” fled from him. And he sent to Jerusalem, and he
made his soldiers bring the children of Judah to the city of Rome, the son of Yosef
(Joseph) being bound in fetters. And when he had questioned them about the kingdom of
Christ, they answered and said unto him, “It is a heavenly kingdom, and Christ will depart
to heaven. And He shall come again at the last day, and shall judge the living and the
dead, and He shall reward each according to his works.” And when the emperor heard
this, he feared exceedingly, and he let the Christians go free, and did not afflict them in any
way; and he ordered his people to pay them honor. Among the number of those who
became martyrs through him was this holy man, whom he tortured with many severe
tortures to make him to deny Christ, but under these tortures the faith and confidence of the
saint increased. After this the emperor placed him in a bull of brass, and lighted a great
fire under him, and whilst the saint was in it he continued to praise God, and to ascribe
holiness to Him, and to thank Him for making him fit to become a martyr for His holy
Name. And then he asked God to heal all the sickness, both of body and soul, of all those
who should make mention of his name, and commemorate him; and he finished his
martyrdom inside the brass bull. And when the infidels cast out his body, certain believers
took his holy body with great honor, and singing, and music, and laid it in a church. When
the saint was in prison angels came to him from Saint John the Evangelist, and they
comforted him and they strengthened him [in the Faith], and they called him “faithful
priest,” and “good shepherd,” and “martyr,” and they informed him that he was to become
martyr. And they said unto him, “Thou shalt be numbered with the holy apostles and
martyrs.” And it is said that from his holy body there exudeth perfume of an exceedingly
sweet odor, to this very day, and that it is beneficial to all those who take it in faith.
Salutation to ‘Antibanis (Antipas), the disciple of John the Evangelist, who was martyred
in a red-hot brazen bull. Anoint thou me, a sinful man, with the scented unguent, which
distilleth from thy body.
And on this day also they commemorate Saba the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

464

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 17
(April 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint James the Apostle, and martyr, the brother of John the son of Zebedee,
became a martyr, after he had preached in the country of Asia. When James went forth to
the Twelve Tribes, which were scattered, he told them of the peace of God our Lord Jesus
Christ, Who is in truth God. Among all these tribes there was none who worshipped God,
but the people of each tribe had their own idols, which they had chosen as gods, and
belonging to each graven image was a service of error, which made the people to go
astray. And there was over the tribes a man set in authority under the kingdom of Herod,
and he commanded that the people, wherever he found them, should work for him, and the
money which he made them to bring to him was very much, and at length his position
became great, and his rule widespread and powerful. When James came to them he
preached to every tribe in the language of his country, for our Lord had endowed him with
the knowledge of every language. He knew not only the language of men, but also the
language of sheep, and cattle, and wild animals, and the fowl of the heavens; and whenever
the people held converse in their own languages, the apostle knew everything [they said],
by the help of the Holy Spirit. And James preached among them, and he commanded them
to put away their evil works from them, and to believe in the Living God, and in His only
Son our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Holy and Life-giving Spirit (through Whom
[existeth] every created thing [and] the things which are in their souls), and Who shall
judge the living and the dead. And he said unto them, “Give not all your goods to the
kings of the earth, but give some to the poor for the salvation of your souls.” And at that
moment the grace of the Holy Spirit dwelt in them, and the fear of God came into their
hearts. And the story of Him was proclaimed throughout all their countries, for at the word
of James the Apostle they believed on Him, and they became strong in the Faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ, the King of heaven and earth, Who doth not reject those who seek Him,
and who turn to Him with a right mind, but Who doth reject all those who believe on
themselves, and in the evil works which they do. And he said, “Leave [these], and turn to
God with a right mind.” And they accepted the words, which Saint James spoke unto
them, and he loved them exceedingly because they made haste to receive his preaching;
and they forsook many works of error, which they did formerly. And Saint James the
Apostle made haste, and built a church for them in each of their countries, and when he
saw the beauty of their Faith, he baptized them in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, and they all rejoiced and were glad together. And he commanded them
with the commands of the Gospel, and the Law of their Faith, and he said unto them, “I
beseech you to let every tribe give to the church for its income the first-fruits of your crops
and your vineyards, and [offerings] from your flocks, and they shall be to God as food for
the poor.” And the people answered and said unto them, “We wish to do whatsoever thou
commandest us”; and [one] tribe brought the first fruits of all their goods to the church.
Now this tribe was under the dominion of Herod the king. And when Herod heard that it
was Saint James the Apostle who had ordered this, he was wroth, and he sent and had him
brought before him. And he said unto him, “Is it thou who hast commanded the people not
to give tribute to Caesar, and not to give gifts to the king, and who hast commanded them
to give away their goods in alms, and to the church, and to the poor?” And Saint James
said, “Yea.” Then was Herod furious with him, and he smote him with the sword, which
465

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
was in his hand, and he cut off his head; and Saint James received an incorruptible crown
in the kingdom of the heavens. And there was a great tumult in Jerusalem, and the king
took Peter, the chief of the Apostles, and shut him up in prison, and he decided to kill him
after the festival of Easter was finished. And the angel of the Lord smote Herod and he
died an evil death and his body stank; he glorified himself and did not glorify God. And
certain believing men took the body of James the Apostle, and swathed it for burial, and
they buried it in the sanctuary. Salutation to the brother of John, the Apostle and
Evangelist, James, the glory and ornament of the Church. Salutation to thee, O thou who
wast bound hand and foot in prison, Salutation to the festival of Easter.Glory be to God
Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 18
(April 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day also the holy and honored Eusebius, the slave of Susenyos, became a martyr.
When the Emperor Diocletian was torturing Saint Susenyos, the father of Saint Susenyos
laid information against this holy man before the emperor, saying, “Susenyos hath a slave,
whose name is ‘Ausonius, and he worshippeth Christ as his God, with all his heart, and he
will not worship the gods.” And the emperor commanded him to be brought to him, and
when he had come, he asked him concerning his Faith, and he confessed our Lord Christ,
and His Godhead, before him. And the emperor used much persuasion, and punished him,
and rebuked him for forsaking the gods. And the holy man rebuked the emperor for
forsaking the Lord Who is God in truth, and the anger and fury of the emperor was added
to greatly, and he ordered the soldiers to cut off the head of the holy man with the sword
before his lord; and they cut off this head with the sword and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to ‘Ausonius the slave of Susenyos.
And on this day also Abba Peter, the brother of Abba ‘Ebsoy, became a martyr. The name
of the father of this holy man was Sidrak, and his mother’s name was Mary. When this
holy man was born, Koris, his mother’s sister, took him, and brought him up with her son
Abba ‘Ebsoy. And when he was seven years old she took him to a teacher, and he learned
all the Law of the Church, and the two continued to fast and to pray, and they worked signs
and wonders; and Gabriel, the angel of the Lord, appeared unto them, and told them that
they were going to become martyrs for the sake of our Lord Christ. And after a few days
Satan led astray the wicked Diocletian, and made him to worship idols. And certain men
accused these holy men of being Christians before Arianus the governor of ‘Ensna, and
when he had them brought before him, he tried to compel them to worship idols. And
when they refused he commanded his soldiers to put them up upon the henbaz (i.e. a sort
of rack) until the blood ran down upon the ground. Now the pain of the torture caused the
blessed Peter great agony, for his body was tender through excessive fasting and prayer;
and straightway the angel of the Lord came and he healed him of his suffering. When
Arianus saw this. He commanded the soldiers to take him to the east of the city, and to cut
off his head with the sword. Now Abba ‘Ebsoy was in the prison house, and the angel of
the Lord caught him up, and brought him to his brother Peter, and they embraced each
other, and kissed, and then they prayed to God to bring them to the heavenly Jerusalem.
466

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And behold a voice came unto them from heaven, saying, “Peace be unto you, O ye
fighters, for ye shall be among the company of heaven, and your bodies shall not be
separated from each other upon earth”; and then the angel of the Lord took Abba Peter and
brought him back into the prison house. And the soldiers cut off the head of the mighty
and victorious Abba Peter, and they hung his body on a tree. Then Abba ‘Ebsoy asked the
keeper of the prison house to let him go away secretly, and having gone he brought the body of
Abba Peter, and swathed it with scented cloths, and buried it in a secret place. Salutation to Peter of goodly
face and form.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 19
(April 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Simon, a native of the country of Armenia, and Bishop of the country of
Persia, became a martyr; and with him were one hundred and fifty others who suffered.
This holy man lived in the reign of Sapor, the son of Hormizd, who was called, “puller out
of the arms,” because when he conquered another king he bound him in fetters, and pulled
out his arms. And he inflicted very severe tribulation upon the believers, and he laid
forced labor upon them. And this holy man sent to him a letter wherein he said, “Those
whom our Lord Jesus Christ hath bought with His honorable Blood are to be saved from
the servitude of men, and they are the servants of our Lord Jesus Christ alone. Therefore
forced labor doth not befit them, and they are not liable to render the illegal and excessive
labor and tribute, which may be decreed for them. But they may choose to die for our Lord
Jesus Christ, Who hath shed His blood for them, and may not perform service for the
wicked men who transgress the Law.” When Sapor had read the letter of this holy man, he
was exceedingly wroth, and he bound him with two chains of iron, and brought him and
cast him into the prison house, where the holy man found many men who denied Christ
and worshipped the sun; but these men were bound for other reasons. And the saint
rebuked them, and taught them, and they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ; and the
soldiers cut off their heads, and they received crowns of martyrdom. After this the king
had this holy man brought, and there were with him one hundred and fifty men, and the
holy man strengthened them until they cut off their heads and they received crowns of
martyrdom. And one of these men was terrified, and he dreaded the sword, and he wished
to deny his Faith; but one of those who were standing there said unto him, “Be not terrified
at the stroke of the sword, which is as nothing, but shut thine eyes and thou shalt be
numbered with the martyrs, and thou shalt reign with our Lord Jesus Christ for ever.” And
he did thus, and he received a crown of martyrdom. Then certain men informed against
that man who had encouraged the other, now his name was Basek, and they brought him to
the king, and the king cut out his tongue and flayed him, and Basek yielded up his soul.
After this he had Saint Simon brought to him, and he said unto him, “Worship the gods. If
thou wilt not do so I will torture thee severely”; and the saint would not obey his
command, and he was not afraid of his torture. And straightway the king commanded his
soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, [and they did so,] and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And all the days of his life were one hundred
467

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and twenty years. Salutation to Simon the Armenian, Bishop of Persia, and salutation to
the one hundred and fifty men who suffered with him, and inherited the kingdom of
heaven with him.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 20
(April 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Babnuda, of the city of Dandara (Denderah in Upper Egypt) became a martyr;
now he was also called “Al-Dandara.” This holy man was an anchorite, and he was a
righteous priest and a fighter. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto
him, “Put on priestly apparel (i.e. the holy vestments), and get thee down from this cell,
and appear before the governor.” Now Arianus the governor had arrived in a ship at the
port of that city, and had asked for the anchorite and found him not. And this holy man
Babnuda came to him of his own free will, and he cried out with a loud voice, saying, “I
am a Christian openly, and I believe in my Lord Jesus Christ.” When the governor knew
that he surely was the anchorite for whom he sought, but could not find, he commanded his
soldiers to torture him severely, and they did so; and they loaded him with iron fetters, and
took him into a dark chamber. And heavenly light shone upon him, and an angel of the
Lord appeared unto him and healed him of his pains, and comforted him. And there was in
that city a certain believer whose name was Carolus, with his wife, and his daughter, and
twelve young women, and the holy man taught them, and strengthened them, and the
soldiers cut off their heads and they became martyrs. And the governor was wroth, and he
commanded his soldiers to hang this holy man our father up, head downwards, and to cast
him into the river, but the holy man, by the power of God, swam out. And the governor
also commanded them to [hang him] on a palm tree, whereupon the palm sent forth fruit,
and produced twelve clusters of dates, and [this fact] is remembered unto this day. After
this they cut off his head, and he delivered up his holy soul, and received the crown of
martyrdom. Salutation to Babnuda, who made the palm to yield fruit. Salutation to the
companions of Babnuda. Salutation to Carolus and to his wife and daughter.
[And on this day is commemorated ‘Ammoni.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 21
(April 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is the festival of the commemoration of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the
God-bearer, who maketh intercession with her Beloved Son on behalf of the children of
468

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
men, and maketh Him to forgive the sins of those who call upon her name. Therefore it is
meet for us to keep the feast on the day of her commemoration. Salutation and blessing be
to the virginity of the Lady Mary, both internally and externally.
And on this day also died the holy father Berutawos. This honorable man was one of the
learned counselors and philosophers in the city of Athens, and he was one of the numbers
of the learned sages of the Council Chamber. He frequented the company of Saint Paul,
the Apostle, and they disputed together about the Faith, and it was clear to Berutawos that
there was no True Faith except that of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he believed through the
Apostle Paul, who baptized him with Christian baptism, and taught him the Ordinances
and Law of the Church; and after this he laid his hand upon him, and made him Bishop of
the city of Athens. And this man frequented the company of Saint Dionysius, [and] Abba
Roba, of peasant family, the chief of the learned men of the great city of Athens, and he
revealed to him the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he explained to him whatsoever
was obscure therein, and he was exceedingly learned. And this holy man Berutawos came
on the day of the death of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, and he stood
among the apostles, and he comforted them with the spiritual songs and hymns which he
had written, and which he himself sang to pretty tunes and to the accompaniment of a
sweetly-voiced flute. He converted many Jews and Gentiles, and brought them to the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; he trafficked in the grace, which had been given unto
him, and he made very great profit thereby. When the apostles wanted to make him a
bishop, he beseeched and entreated them, saying, “Be pleased to excuse me, for I am not
fitted for this honorable position, and I am not able to perform the duties of a priest.” And
having received heavenly grace in his knowledge, and work, and learning, he departed to
God. Salutation to Berutawos who sang and played funerary music with the Apostles,
when the Virgin Mary died.
And on this day were martyred ‘Akresokos, and Yak’asos, and Yoras.
And on this day also died the honored father, the great and memorable preacher of the
Faith, who was like unto the Apostles, Abba ‘Inbakom (Habakkuk). God called this holy
man from a far country to the monastery of our father Abba Takla Haymanot, in the days
of our father Peter, and it was Peter who baptized him, with Christian baptism, with his
own hand, and he gave him into the charge of a teacher, and after this he arrayed him in the
garb of a monk. And ‘Inbakom (Habakkuk) fought good spiritual fights of every kind, and
at length he was worthy to be appointed to the throne of our father Takla Haymanot, and he
was one of the company of the Eleven Learned Fathers. After this he departed to God,
Who loved him, at a good old age, having suffered much tribulation and persecution, and
labored hard. Salutation to ‘Inbakom (Habakkuk).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

469

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 22
(April 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Isaac, from the city of Harin, in the district of Sebko,
in the north of Egypt. This holy man had pious parents, and his father’s name was
Abraham, and his mother’s name was Sosna; his mother died when he was a child and left
him alone with his father. When he had grown a little, he herded his father’s sheep, and
his father married another wife. In those days there was a great famine, and his father’s
wife hated him, and only gave him a little bread, and this holy man used to give his food to
the shepherds, and fasted the whole day long until the evening; now at that time he was
five years old. When his father knew that his son used to give his food to the shepherds
and fast all day until the evening, he went to see him. And this holy man, knowing the
matter before his father came to him, tied up three pieces of mud in his cloak, so that his
father might think when he saw them that they were three loaves of bread tied up in it.
And when his father came to him, and unrolled the cloak, and found the three pieces of
mud he thought they were loaves of bread. And he asked the boy to tell him if he had
given his bread that day to the shepherds or not, and he said, “Yea.” And he gave his food
to the shepherds, and many came and heard this; and his father marveled, and glorified
God. When this holy man had grown up he went and became a monk with a certain
righteous man whose name was Elias, and he lived with him for many years. When Abba
Elias died Abba Isaac went to the monastery of Barnug, and he lived with an elder whose
name was Zacharias, and he devoted himself to the ascetic life, and fought a great spiritual
fight. And his father went about in every district, trying to find him. When his father
came to the monastery of Barnug, and found him there, he asked him to return with him,
and Isaac refused. And Abba Zacharias said unto him, “Go with thy father, and live with
him until he dies”; and the holy man went with his father; and he had been living with his
father a few days when his father died. And all the goods, which his father left, he gave to
the poor and needy, and then he built for himself an abode far from the city, and he dwelt
there alone, and devoted himself to the ascetic life. And he fought a great fight, with
fasting, and prayer, and ceaseless vigils, until he died in peace, and he was buried in his
abode, and the place was forgotten. After many years God willed to reveal it, and a lighted
lamp, which appeared above his grave, was seen by certain men who were reaping; and
having seen this miracle for a space of three days, they marveled exceedingly. When they
came to that place to look at it, the lamp disappeared, and when the story of the saint was
noised abroad, and the place had been seen by them, they found the lamp burning above
his grave. Then the saint appeared unto certain believers in a dream, and told them the
place where his body was, and they took it up with great honor, and laid it on a camel.
Then thy set out and journeyed on until they came to the middle of his city Harin, and the
middle of Mesrat; and there the camel knelt down, and would not get up again. And they
beat the camel with many strips, but he would not get up, and they knew that it was by the
Will of God that he would not move. And they decided to build a shrine for him there, and
to lay him in it; and they built a church in his name, and laid his body in it, and through it
many signs and wonders took place. Salutation to Isaac, who made clods of earth to
appear to be loaves of bread.

470

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Alexander, the nineteenth Archbishop of
the city of Alexandria, concerning whom the apostolic Athanasius saith, “My father
Alexander never read the Gospel sitting down, but he read it standing up with the light in
front of him.” And concerning him he also mentions the following: “The chief widows
came to him, and they spoke unto him, saying: There is with us a certain virgin who fasts
seven days at a time, but she doeth no work with her hands. And he said unto them, O my
sisters, I never fast two days at a time. I never eat when the sun hath appeared. I eat in
moderation. And he told them that one should eat in moderation and fast in moderation,
and work in moderation, in every good matter.” The parents of this holy man were
Christians. He grew up in the service of the Church, and he was reared therein, for
Maximus made him a reader, and Abba Theonas made him a deacon, and Abba Peter made
him a priest; and he was pure, and a virgin from his youth. When the time drew nigh for
Abba Peter to become a martyr, this holy father Alexander and ‘Akilas went to him when
he was in prison, and asked him to remove the excommunication from Arius, for Arius had
asked them both to ask Abba Peter about him. When they asked Abba Peter, he
excommunicated Arius again in their presence. And he informed them, saying, “Our Lord
Jesus Christ appeared unto me, ‘Arius hath rent My human nature,’ and He commanded
me not to receive him again.” And Abba Peter told them that “Akilas should become
archbishop after him, and that after ‘Akilas, Alexander should be archbishop. And he told
them this thing before the priests of the Thorah of the city of Alexandria, and he
commanded them not to receive Arius, and to have no fellowship with him. When Abba
Peter had finished his martyrdom, ‘Arkilas was made archbishop after him, and he
transgressed and received Arius, and made him a priest; therefore ‘Arkilas lived only seven
months and died. After him this father Alexander was made archbishop, and as soon as he
had taken his seat, the elders of the people came and asked him to receive Arius, but he
refused to do so, and added curses to those, which he had already heaped upon him. And
he said unto them, “Father Peter commanded me and ‘Arkilas not to receive Arius, and he
told us, saying, “Take heed that thou dost not receive Arius, and thou shalt have no
fellowship with him.” And ‘Arkilas having received Arius, God speedily removed him
from his office; and Alexander said, “Nay, I will not receive him.” And he expelled Arius,
and the people who believed in his evil Faith. Then Arius went to the Emperor
Constantine, and laid an accusation against this holy man, saying, “Alexander hath
excommunicated me wrongfully.” And Constantine assembled the General Council of
Three Hundred and Eighteen Saints in the city of Nicea. And this father was the President
of the Council, and he disputed with Arius and revealed his denial to Christ (or, infidelity)
in words, which were light in their expression, but weighty in their majesty; and they
excommunicated him and would not receive his words. And Alexander uttered the Faith,
which God spoke, with his own mouth unto all the fathers, and he drew up the Canon, and
the Law, and [rules for] right judgment, and these are in the hands of Christians until this
day. And he made regulations for the Fast (i.e. Lent), and the festival of Easter, and he
returned to his office victorious and joyful. And he shepherded his flock in grace and in
peace, and he sat upon the throne of Mark the evangelist for seventeen years, and he died
in peace. Salutation to Alexander, President of the Council of Nicea, who made the
excommunication of Arius to resound in heaven and upon earth.
And on this day died the holy father Abba Mark, the Second, the forty-ninth Archbishop of
the city of Alexandria. This father was a native of Alexandria, and he was a virgin, and
chaste, and learned, and honorable, and he was the second Archbishop of Alexandria with
the name of Mark. Abba John made him a deacon, and he performed the duties of that
471

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
office exceedingly well. He was an eloquent speaker, and his voice was sweet, and
because of his learning and his knowledge of the Books (the Scriptures) all those who
heard him rejoiced in him. Then Abba John made him to live in his house, and he
delivered to him the regulation and administration of the archiepiscopate, and he did
nothing whatsoever without his advice. And he arrayed him in the garb of the monk, in the
monastery of Saint Abba Macarius. And at the moment when he put on the garb of the
monk, a certain righteous man from among the holy fathers came, and spoke unto him
before all the people, saying, “This deacon whose name is John (sic) shall, rightly and
fittingly, sit upon the throne of his father Mark, the evangelist.” When the time of the
death of Abba John drew nigh, he spoke unto the bishops, and told them that they must
make this father archbishop; and they rejoiced in him, and they appointed him by force,
and against his wish, after he fled from them to the desert of Scete. And they sent for him,
and bound him, and they brought him and enthroned him. In his days he restored the
churches, and rebuilt those that were in a ruinous state, and in his days he removed the
heresies of the heretics who appeared in his days in the country of Egypt. And he made a
church for them specially, and they sat therein, and he rebuked and admonished them, and
he counted them among the sheep of his flock. And God made manifest through this father
many signs and wonders, and he healed multitudes of sick folk, and he drove out the filthy
devils which possessed men. And he said unto one of them, “Understand that this would
not have come upon thee unless thou hadst shown irreverence to the Holy Mysteries. Rise
up, without fear, and henceforward guard thyself against the vain word which would go
forth from thy mouth.” And in his days the Muslim Arabs used to carry off many
Christians from Rom, and bring them to the city of Alexandria and sell them. And this
father was exceedingly sorrowful about this, and he borrowed money from the monasteries
and begged money from believing men, and he bought many Roman Christians from the
Muslims for three thousand dinars in gold; and he wrote for them bills of manumission and
set them free. And he said unto them, “Whosoever among you wisheth to depart to his
own country I will supply him with what he needeth [for the voyage], and send him off,
and whosoever among you wisheth to stay with me, I will look after him and protect him.”
When any of them wished to return to their own country he gave them the money
necessary for the journey, and had them protected on their way until they reached their
own country; and for those who remained with him, he provided wives and protected
them. After this he took thought for the Church of our Redeemer in the city of Alexandria,
and restored it; Satan stirred up a riot in the city, and the church was burned, but this father
restored it again. When God willed to give him rest be became a little sick. And on Easter
Sunday Saint Mark the evangelist appeared unto him, and told him about the everlasting
joy which God had prepared for him, and he made known unto him, saying, “After thou
hast received the Holy Mysteries thou shalt rest.” Having awoke from his sleep he told the
bishops who were about him what he had seen, and he commanded them to begin the
service of consecration of the Offering, and he himself consecrated and received the Holy
Mysteries. And he said unto them, “I embrace you all with a holy embrace,” and he died
in peace straightway. And all the days, which he sat, were twenty years. Salutation to
Alexander, who ransomed the captive Roman Christians for thirty thousand dinars in gold.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Michael, the fifty-third Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This holy father was a righteous man, and a monk, and he was made
abbot of the church of Saint Abba John of the desert of Scete. And they seized him against
his will, now it was with the greatest difficulty that they seized him and made him
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, on the 24th day of the month of Hedar; and he
472

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
devoted himself to the ascetic life and he ordered his course after the manner of the
Apostles. When the Great Fast came, the holy man went up to the desert of Scete to keep
the Great Fast there, and his spiritual fight and his strenuous asceticism when he was in the
desert by himself are remembered. Before he was made archbishop, he prayed to God with
tears and groans, saying, “O God, Thou knowest how much I love to dwell by myself, and
that I have not strength enough for this office, [to say] nothing about my fitness. I beseech
Thee, because of the greatness of Thy compassion, to take my soul and to give me rest in
this Fast.” And God received his petition, and it came to pass that after the Easter Festival
God called him, and gave him rest. And the days of his office were two years and five
months. Salutation to Michael, whose soul God took according to his request.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 23
(May 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy and honored, the great star of the East, Abba George, the fighter,
became a martyr. The name of the father of this holy man was Anastasius, and he was
from the country of Cappadocia; his mother’s name was Theobesta, and she was from the
country of Palestine. When George was twenty years old his father died, and he rose up
and went to the Emperor Dodyanos so that he might received the appointment, which his
father had held. And he found that the emperor was setting up idols, and worshipping
them, and that he was compelling all men to worship idols. And George divided all the
goods, which were his among the poor and the needy, and set free his slaves, and he stood
up before the emperor, and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ. And the emperor tried to
persuade him [to reject Christ], and promised him many great [honors], but he would not
turn [to idolatry], and he would not submit to him. And the emperor tortured him with
many tortures, but God strengthened him and healed his wounds. And He told him that he
should die three times for His holy Name, and that each time He would raise him up, but
that when he died for the fourth time he should received the crown of martyrdom. And He
promised him that he should inherit great and well-known fame in all the ends of the
world, and informed him that he should continue to be tortured for . . . (7?) years, and that
He would send His angels to minister unto him. Now the emperor was exceedingly sad
and sorry because of all the many tortures which he was inflicting upon Saint George, and
because the saint would not submit to him. After this the emperor brought to him a great
and powerful magician whose name was Athanasius, and he concocted a cup full of
poison, and gave it to that saint to drink, and he thought that he would die as soon as he
had drunk it. When Saint George had drunk the cup, which was full of poison, he received
no injury whatsoever; and the magician believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and became a
martyr. And the emperor had an instrument brought wherein were teeth like a saw, and he
commanded his soldiers to saw the saint in it, and when they had sawn him, he delivered
up his soul; but our Lord Jesus Christ raised him up, and the saint returned to the city.
When the people saw this, many of them believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and they
received crowns of martyrdom; and they were in number thirty thousand and seven
hundred souls. When Saint George stood before the Emperor Dodyanos, in the place
473

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
where the kings assembled, now the kings were sitting upon seventy thrones, the emperor
said unto him, “We wish thee to make these thrones whereon we are now sitting to put
forth leaves, and bear fruit.” And Saint George prayed to God concerning these thrones,
and they put forth leaves and bore fruit straightway. And after this they took Saint George,
and boiled him in a brass cauldron, and then threw him out into the desert, but God
restored his soul to his body, and raised him up again; and the saint returned to the kings,
preached the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ openly. And they all marveled and said unto
him, “If thou wilt raise the dead we shall know that thy God is God indeed, and we will
believe.” And Saint George prayed to God, and he raised up for them from a cave very
many dead people, both men and women and young people. And these preached the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and told the people about Gahanam, and the Judgment (or,
punishment); and after this they returned to their graves, and died. And when those
infidels who were contending against him, and resisting him, saw this they said, “These
creatures which thou hast raised up are unclean spirits; they are Satanic spirits, and not
men.” And because of their great sadness and sorrow for Saint George, and the tortures
which he was condemned by them to suffer, and in order that he might submit to them,
they committed him to the care of a poor beggar woman. And when the poor woman went
out to beg for bread the angel of the Lord brought him a table whereon there were all kinds
of good food. And there was in the house of that woman a piece of dry wood, and Saint
George prayed to God, and that wood germinated, and put forth leaves, and it became a tall
tree with long branches and much foliage. And when the poor widow came and saw that
great miracle, and how that tree had shot up, and the table, she marveled, and she brought
her son who was blind, and deaf, and dumb, and a paralytic, and asked the saint to heal
him for her. And he told her the way to God, and she believed on our Lord Jesus Christ.
And the saint made the sign of the Cross over the face of the child and he saw straightway.
And Saint George said unto her, “I will that the next time he may be able to hear, and to
walk and to speak.” And the emperor passed through the city, and saw that tree, and he
marveled, and asked questions concerning it. And they told him, saying, “This tree is in
the house of the widow wherein Saint Gorge dwelleth.” And the emperor having
remembered Saint George had him brought to him, and he commanded his soldiers to beat
him with very many stripes, and they beat him, and crushed his feet, and he died for the
third time, and they cast [his body] outside the city; but God raised him up and he returned
to the kings. When the Emperor saw him, he marveled, and was frightened, because of all
the tortures to which he had subjected the saint, and he began to speak him fair and he
promised to give him his daughter in marriage and to make him the second in the kingdom
[if he would deny Christ]. Then the saint made a mock of him, and promised him,
untruthfully, that he would offer incense to his gods. And the emperor rejoiced, and
thought that the saint would do so actually, and he ran to him, and kissed his head, and
brought him into the royal palace. And the saint rose up to pray, and he prayed, and
repeated a psalm of David, and the empress, the wife of the emperor, kissed him, and asked
him to explain to her what he had read. And he began to make her to know and to
understand the matter from the time when God created the world, to the Incarnation of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and his words entered her heart and she believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ. And on the following day a herald went round calling upon all the men of the city
to gather together in order to see Saint George make an offering of incense to the gods.
And when the widow heard this, she was exceedingly sorry, and she went out with the
multitude to see Saint George make an offering of incense to the idols. And when the saint
saw her he rejoiced, and said unto her son, “Go to Apollo, and command him to come
474

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
hither to me in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ”; and the widow’s son was healed
straightway, and he walked and talked, and he went to the idol, and told him what Saint
George had told him to say. And he drove out the Satan that foul spirit, which dwelt in the
idol, and brought it to Saint George. And the idol confessed before all the people, saying,
“I am not God, but a creature that leadeth men into error.” And the saint commanded the
earth to swallow him up, and straightway the earth swallowed that deceiver. When the
emperor saw this, he and all those who were with him were ashamed. And being filled
with fury and wrath against Saint George, he came to the empress his wife, and she said
unto him, “Did I not tell thee not to oppose the Galilean? Their God is strong and
mighty.” And the emperor was exceedingly wroth with her, for he knew that Saint George
had brought her into the True Faith. And he commanded his soldiers to drag her outside
the city, and to cut up her body with a saw, [and they did so,] and she received the crown
of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Then straightway the kings were afraid
because of Saint George, and they advised the Emperor Dodyanos to write the order for the
soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, so that he might have rest from Saint George,
the mighty one, the conqueror, rejoiced exceedingly. And he entreated our Lord Jesus
Christ to bring down fire from heaven and destroy the seventy kings, so that they might
cease from inflicting tribulation upon the Church. And straightway fire came down from
heaven, and burnt up the seventy kings and all their soldiers. Then our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared unto Saint George and made many covenants with him. And he said unto him,
“Whosoever shall commemorate thee upon earth I will destroy all his sins. Whosoever is
in tribulation, whether by sea or on land, or is sick, and entreateth Me in thy name, I will
deliver him quickly from his tribulation”; having said this He went up into heaven. After
this the saint bowed his neck, and they cut off his holy head with the sword, and he
received three everlasting crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And four
of his believing slaves took the body of Saint George, and wrapped it up in his apparel, and
took it into the city of Leda, and they built a beautiful church, and laid his body therein,
and countless miracles were wrought there. Salutation to thee, O George, the root of
thousands of martyrs. Salutation to the ninety men and thirty-seven women who, when
they saw the hidden glory of the heavens revealed at the martyrdom of Saint George,
became martyrs.
And on this day also died Roko. This holy man was such a strenuous fighter in the spirit
that he made signs and miracles manifest. One day the sickness of the plague smote him,
and he prayed to God with abundant tears, and showed Him his sores. And our Lord Jesus
Christ appeared unto him, sitting upon a cloud of heaven, and He stood up before him and
said unto him, “Fear not, O My beloved Roko, behold I have come unto thee to heal thee
of thy sickness, and to establish with thee a covenant that all those who shall pray unto Me
in thy name, saying, ‘Jesus Christ, the God of Roko, deliver me for I am afflicted,’ shall be
free from the sickness of the plague, and it shall not come upon them.” After He had said
this unto him, our Lord Jesus Christ went up into heaven. And the holy man lived in strict
devotion to the ascetic life for many [years], and he died in peace. Salutation to Roko, the
chosen fighter.
Salutation to Stephana, a friend of Victor the martyr. [Omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

475

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 24
(May 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Sana, the companion of Saint Isidore, whose history is told in the section
for the eighteenth day of the month of Megabit, became a martyr. After this holy man had
been tortured with his companion, Isidore [died] and received the crown of martyrdom;
and this holy man Sana remained in the prison house. And he who was governor of the
city of Farma at that time was abolished, and another governor was appointed to succeed
him; and the infidel emperor commanded that governor not to leave [alive] anyone who
mentioned the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And they told him about the fight of this
holy man Sana, and informed him that he was a captain of soldiers, and told him that he
had been tortured severely, and would not turn from his counsel. And the governor
commanded his soldiers to cut off his holy head, [and they did so,] and he received the
crown of life. And his mother saw angels of light taking his soul, and carrying it up to
heaven, and she said she had seen this when Isidore was martyred. Then they took the
body of Saint Sana, and swathed it for burial, and laid it with the body of Saint Isidore, his
friend; and their bodies remain in the city of Samnud, and the people thereof keep a great
feast in their honor. And many signs and wonders appear through them to those who go to
them in faith. Salutation to Sana and Isidore.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Sanutya (Shenuti), the fifty-fifth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This holy and spiritual father was a monk from his
early years in the church of Saint Macarius, in the desert of Scete, and he advanced in good
works as he became older, and his excellences increased, and he devoted himself to the
ascetic life, and fought a good fight. And he was appointed abbot in the house of Saint
Abba Macarius, and the bishops and all the people chose him, and appointed him
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And great tribulation and very much sorrow came
upon him during all the days of his office, and the Muslim kings afflicted him, and they
seized him and bound him in fetters; and they demanded money from him, but he had
nothing whatsoever to give them. And God performed through him many signs and
wonders and he healed many sick folk of grievous sicknesses, and he cast out Satans from
men. And through his prayer God sent down very much rain upon the men of the country
of Mareotis, who remained in a state of severe famine for ten years through want of rain;
for the wells in the country had dried up and the streams and they well-nigh died of thirst.
When this father came to them to celebrate a festival in the church of Saint Abba Minas,
the martyr, all the men of the city gathered together to him and told him how much they
were suffering through want of water, and he comforted them and encouraged them to be
patient. When this father had ended the Liturgy he entreated God to have mercy upon His
creation, and to teach them. When the time of sunset arrived the rain began to fall in large
drops, and then ceased. And this father said, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom belongeth
glory, O Master, if Thou wishest to teach Thy people, and to show compassion unto them
with the riches of Thy compassion, and the abundance of Thy mercies, let them be filled
and satisfied with Thy mercy, and with Thy blessing, in Thy good pleasure.” Having said
this he went into his bed-chamber to pray the prayer for sleep, and then he asked God to
remember His people, and to show mercy upon them. And when he finished his prayer,
there came mighty thunders and lightning, and the rain descended like a flood, and filled
476

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
all the holes in the ground, and the gardens, and the wells and the grounds round about
them. He remained three years in that land and was there during three years of famine. On
another occasion the Arabs of Upper Egypt assembled, and came to the desert of Scete,
and they surrounded the monasteries, and wished to kill all the monks who dwelt in them,
and to plunder the monasteries. And this holy father took his own cross, and went out
against them, and when they saw the cross in his hand, they turned backwards and did no
harm whatsoever. And this father expelled all infidelity from his country by his learning,
and also from his flock. Now at that time there were men who said that He Who suffered
for us was only a man and not God. And this father wrote a letter and sent it during the
days of the Great holy Fast (i.e. Lent) to all cities, and in it he spoke thus: “God the Word
suffered for us in His Body, and His Divine Nature was not separated from His human
nature, not for an hour, nay, not for the twinkling of an eye. These two Natures were one
from the beginning, and they were not separated in any way whatsoever by any operation;
and at the time of His Passion and Death they were not separated.” When this letter was
read in all the cities, all the Christians therein rejoiced with a great joy. And there also
appeared certain accursed men who said, now their tongues ought to be cut out! that His
Divine Nature died; these were the men of the city of Balyana, and their bishops. When
this father heard the report of them he was very sad, and he wrote other letters wherein he
said, “The Nature of God, the Word, is unknowable, and intangible, and impassable, and
suffering can only enter the human nature which God the Word took and made one with
His Godhead, without separation, and without mingling, and without change.” And he also
said therein, “We do not separate God the Word from our flesh which suffered, but we
believe that He was One at the time of His Passion, and likewise we also believe that His
Godhead neither suffered nor died, but that He suffered, and died in the flesh, only without
separation of His Godhead.” When his letters reached these men, and they had read them,
they turned from their error, and they believed in their Faith in righteousness and integrity.
And their bishops came and confessed before our father, the archbishop, the True and
Right Faith, and they entreated our father Archbishop Sanutya (Shenuti), saying, “Forgive
us our sin and error.” And this father commanded them to bow down before all the
bishops, and priests, and people, and to say unto them, “Forgive us, for we have sinned and
gone astray, for it was Satan who led us into error.” And they did as the archbishop
commanded them, and he forgave them their sins. And this father thought much about the
churches, and their buildings, and the places wherein pilgrims sojourned, and what moneys
were left him he gave to the poor and needy; and he followed a good course of life and
pleased God. And the days of his office were fifteen years, and he died in peace.
Salutation to the mighty Archbishop who drove away the Enemy by the Cross which was
in his hand.
And on this day also are commemorated the consecration of Dabra Sina, and Abba
Yasdera of Sina.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

477

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 25
(May 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Sara and her two sons became martyrs. This holy woman was a native of
the city of Antioch, and she was the wife of a certain man whose name was Socrates; now
he was a governor of Diocletian, and a Christian. Subsequently he denied Christ, but his
wife remained a Christian. And her husband said unto her, “I love the Faith of Christ, but I
denied Him, because I am afraid of the emperor’s torturing.” And this holy woman
brought forth by him two sons, and she was unable to have them baptized with Christian
baptism in the city of Antioch, through her fear of the emperor, and through fear of her
husband; but because of her exceeding great love for our Lord Jesus Christ she strove in
every way possible to have her sons baptized with Christian baptism. And she took her
two sons, and two slaves with her, and she embarked in a ship, wishing to go to the city of
Alexandria, to Abba Peter, the archbishop. Now God willed to reveal the greatness of her
Faith to the generation which was to come. And God raised up a wind at sea, and a very
great and violent storm, and the storm was so violent that the ship was nigh to founder; and
the holy woman was afraid that her sons would be drowned without being baptized. And
straightway she rose up, and prayed a long prayer, and then she took a razor, and made a
cut in her right breast, and she took some of her blood and made therewith the sign of the
Cross upon the foreheads, and over the hearts, and on the breasts, and on the backs of both
of her sons; and she dipped them in the sea thrice, saying, “In the Name of the Father and
the Son and the Holy Ghost.” And after she had done this, there came a great calm on the
sea. When she arrived in the city of Alexandria, she took her sons to Abba Peter, the
Archbishop, that he might baptize them with Christian baptism, together with the children
of the city. Having baptized one of the children of the city, he took her sons to baptize
them, and straightway the water congealed, and fell off them. And he took another child of
the city and the water became liquid, and he baptized him, and the water returned to its
natural form. And the archbishop took the sons of this holy woman [a second time] to
baptize them, and straightway the water congealed again; this he did thrice and the water
congealed thrice. And he had their mother brought, and he questioned her, and thereupon
she told him everything that had happened to her, and how the wind and storm had risen on
the sea against her, and how she had cut her breast, and baptized her sons; and she asked
him to forgive her sin, for it was because she was afraid that she had done [this thing].
And Saint Abba Peter said unto her, “Fear not, for it is our Lord Jesus Christ Who hath
baptized thy sons, with His own hand, when thou didst immerse them in the sea.” And
when the holy baptism of her sons was completed by the hand of Saint Abba Peter, the
Archbishop, they received the Holy Mysteries and she returned to her husband in the city
of Antioch. When she came to him he was wroth with her, because of what she had done,
and he went to the emperor and informed against her, and told him what she had done.
And the emperor had her brought before him, and said unto her, “Why didst thou go to the
city of Alexandria? Hast thou been playing the whore with Christians?” And the holy
woman answered and said unto him, “Christians do not play the whore, and they do not
worship idols; and after this do what thou wishest, for thou wilt not hear another word
from me.” And the emperor said unto her, “Tell me what happened unto thee in the city of
Alexandria,” but she vouchsafed him no reply whatsoever. And the emperor commanded
his soldiers to tie her hands behind her, and to set her two sons upon her belly, and to burn
478

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
all three of them together in the fire. And she turned her holy face to the East, and prayed,
and then they burnt her, with her sons, in the fire, and she received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Sara.
And on this day also are commemorated Dara, and Abba John the archbishop.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Abba Babnuda, the anchorite, and Saint
Theodore, the fighter, and one hundred martyrs who received crowns of martyrdom in the
kingdom of Persia (or, Egypt). Salutation to Babnuda, and to father Theodore, and to four
men in the country of Persia.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 26
(May 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Susenyos, the son of Su’Epeter, became a martyr. The father of this holy
man was a friend of the Emperor Diocletian the infidel, who was emperor. And the angel
of the Lord appeared unto him, and strengthened his heart, so that he might become a
martyr; and this thing was ever in his mind. And after this the emperor sent him to the
country of Nicomedia, and he sent to him an edict ordering him to restore the worship of
idols; when the saint saw this he sorrowed exceedingly. Then he sent and brought a priest,
and he learned from him the doctrine of the Church, and the priest baptized him with
Christian baptism. After this he returned to the country of Antioch, where he found that
his sister had given birth to a child, whose creation (or, nature) had been changed by a
Satan. She had given birth to a daughter, whom she had killed, and whose blood she had
drunk, for there dwelt in her a Satan, who, by his magic, could take the form of a bird or
serpent. When a child was born to any of the natives of the city, the mother used to go
down, and kill him by magic and drink his blood. And when Saint Susenyos saw this, he
took his spear in his hand, and killed his sister and her child also, for he was the son of
Satan; and he killed her husband, and her husband’s father, for they were magicians, and
they used to inflict sicknesses on a man and kill him. After this he returned to Nicomedia,
and he came to that priest who had baptized him with Christian baptism, and told him
everything that had happened to him. When he returned to his city, and his father knew it,
he wanted to kill him, and he accused him to the emperor [of being a Christian]. At that
time Saint Susenyos went to the emperor in the house of his idols, and he commanded the
idols, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to descend into Sheol; and straightway the
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up. And the story of how Saint Susenyos
had destroyed their idols was noised abroad, and again his father made accusations against
him before the emperor. And the emperor was wroth with him, and commanded his
soldiers to torture him with severe tortures. And they beat him, and smote him with brass
rods, and they broke him on the wheel, and they crushed him with the instruments
wherewith grain is crushed, and they dragged him through the city. And God strengthened
him, and enabled him to endure all these tortures, and the angel of the Lord visited him at
all times, and strengthened him and healed his wounds, and raised him up whole and
479

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
uninjured. And many men, who believed on our Lord Jesus Christ through him, became
martyrs. When the emperor was tired he said to one of his men, “Behold, command them
to cut off his holy head with the sword,” [and they cut it off,] and he received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And the number of those who became martyrs,
during the time they were torturing the saint, was eleven hundred and ninety. Salutation to
Susenyos, the son of Su’E Peter, and salutation to the eleven hundred and ninety martyrs of
the company of Susenyos.
And on this day also John, the son of a carpenter, became a martyr. This holy man was a
native of the city of Nineveh, and his father was a maker of wooden images, and a
worshipper of idols; his mother was a Christian. Lacking a son she prayed to God, and she
brought forth this saint, and called his name “John” in secret. When he was eight years of
age, he helped his father, who bought wooden figures for his son to carve. One day as he
was going about buying idols, the angel of the Lord met him, and told him that idols were
the abode of Satan, and commanded him to cast them from his hands; and he taught him
the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Saint John returned to his father and said unto
him, “There is no god but God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth; I will not worship
the work of men’s hands.” When his father heard this, he tied him up in the prison house.
And his mother came and made his heart strong to shed his blood for the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Then the people of the city came to persuade him with their words, and they
said unto him, “O boy, why dost thou forsake thy father’s gods?” And Saint John said
unto them, “I will not worship the work of men’s hands, for [idols] are the abodes of filthy
devils.” When his father heard his words he took up his saw, and cut off his son’s head,
but the young man did not fall down, and he stood upright on his feet, and was baptized
with his own blood. And his mother came and took [his body, and she said], “O my Lord
Jesus Christ, for Whom praise is meet, receive Thou from me this offering, O Thou Who
didst accept the offering of Abel in the field.” And Satan entered the heart of his father
and made him mad, and his wife took him, and brought him to the grave of her son, and
prayed for him. And Saint John came by night, and pierced his father with a spear, and
Satan went out of him, and then he believed and was baptized in the Name of the Father
and the Son and the Holy Ghost. Salutation to John of Nineveh, who was a lamp which
dispelled the dense darkness of sin.
And on this day also were martyred the saints Sebbidoras, and Abba Serga, and Dereys
(Dirayes), and Says.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 27
(May 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Victor became a martyr. The name of the father of this holy man was
Hermanos (Romanus), the captain of the host of the Emperor Diocletian, and his
counselor; and his opinion, and his word, in respect of the worship of idols, was one with
those of the Emperor Diocletian. And the name of the blessed woman, his mother, was
480

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Martha, and she was a Christian. When Saint Victor grew up, he was near the emperor,
and his rank was the third in the royal palace. At that time his days were ten years. And
he rejected this world, and the glory thereof. He ate no flesh, and drank no wine, he fasted
continually, he prayed many prayers without ceasing by day and by night, he visited those
who were in prison, and he gave alms to the poor and needy. And when they killed Saint
Theodada, the mother of the Saints Cosmas and Damianus, no one dared to go near her
through fear of the emperor. And Saint Victor came, and carried away her body, and
buried it, and was unafraid; and he rebuked his father on several occasions for idolatry.
And his father laid information against him before the emperor. When Saint Victor was
brought before the emperor, he unfastened his military girdle, and threw it in the face of
the emperor, saying, “Take this gift, which thou didst give me,” and he uttered
blasphemies against the emperor, and against his idols. And Hermanos (Romanus)
counseled the emperor, and told him to send Victor to the city of Alexandria, to the
governor Herminius, so that he might torture him severely. And they brought out the holy
man and set a bridle (i.e. a gag) in his mouth, and his mother bade him farewell with many
tears. And he commanded his mother about the poor, and the needy, and the widows, and
the orphans, telling her to visit them, and to give them what they needed. And when he
arrived in Alexandria, Herminius, the governor, tortured him very severely. And the angel
of the Lord appeared, and took his soul, and carried it up into heaven, and showed him the
abode of the beings of light; and [then] his soul returned to his body again. And the
governor inflicted further tortures upon him by means of boiling oil and pitch. After this
he had him laid upon an iron bed, and had a fire lighted under him, and then he had him
cast into the furnace which heated the baths [of the city]; and he inflicted upon him every
kind of torture. And God strengthened him, and made him to endure, and He sent His
angel unto him to heal his wounds. And after this the governor sent Saint Victor to the
city, the name of which is Antoine, where he was tortured severely, and they cut out his
tongue, and drove red-hot iron instruments through his sides; but God gave him strength
and enabled him to endure. And after this they imprisoned him in a desert fortress, so that
he might die. Now Saint Victor knew the craft of the carpenter, and he made tools and
sold them; with a part of the price he fed himself sparingly, and the rest he gave to the poor
and needy. And a certain governor came, and took up his abode near that fortress, and the
people told him the story of Saint Victor, how that he was the son of Hermanos
(Romanus), the captain of the imperial army of Antioch. And the governor had him
brought to him, and he urged him greatly [to deny Christ], but he would not turn and he
would not obey his behest. And the governor commanded his soldiers to torture him, and
they tortured him severely. They tore out his tongue by its roots, they beat his mouth, they
hung him up head downwards, and suspended heavy stones from his hands; and after this
they threw him into an oven which had been made red-hot, they poured boiling pitch and
oil over him, they pounded him with pounding instruments, and they made his face to
smart and sting with acid and dust, and they put salt in his eyes; and after this they brought
him out and hung him up head downwards. And our Lord Jesus Christ strengthened him,
and enabled him to endure, and restored to him his members. And there was a certain
maiden, whose days were fifteen years, and who saw Saint Victor from the window of her
house whilst they were torturing him, and she also saw angels, with crowns in their hands,
and they were placing them on the head of Saint Victor. And she informed the people
what she had seen, and they marveled exceedingly, and many of them believed on our
Lord Jesus Christ, and became martyrs. And that maiden believed on the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and [confessed her belief] before the governor, and he commanded his
481

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
soldiers to cut off her head; [and they did so,] and she received the crown of martyrdom.
After this the governor commanded them to cut off the holy head of Saint Victor with the
sword, [and they did so,] and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. And certain believing men took the body of the saint and wrapped it in linen and
in beautiful and costly stuffs and they laid it in a pure place until Martha came from the
city of Antioch, and built a beautiful church for it. And she laid his body therein, and
through it great signs and wonders took place. Two-fold salutation to Victor and salutation
to those who associated themselves with him in his martyrdom, and who themselves
became martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 28
(May 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Sana, the companion of Saint Isidore, whose history is told in the section
for the eighteenth day of the month of Megabit, became a martyr. After this holy man had
been tortured with his companion, Isidore [died] and received the crown of martyrdom;
and this holy man Sana remained in the prison house. And he who was governor of the
city of Farma at that time was abolished, and another governor was appointed to succeed
him; and the infidel emperor commanded that governor not to leave [alive] anyone who
mentioned the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And they told him about the fight of this
holy man Sana, and informed him that he was a captain of soldiers, and told him that he
had been tortured severely, and would not turn from his counsel. And the governor
commanded his soldiers to cut off his holy head, [and they did so,] and he received the
crown of life. And his mother saw angels of light taking his soul, and carrying it up to
heaven, and she said she had seen this when Isidore was martyred. Then they took the
body of Saint Sana, and swathed it for burial, and laid it with the body of Saint Isidore, his
friend; and their bodies remain in the city of Samnud, and the people thereof keep a great
feast in their honor. And many signs and wonders appear through them to those who go to
them in faith. Salutation to Sana and Isidore.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Sanutya (Shenuti), the fifty-fifth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This holy and spiritual father was a monk from his
early years in the church of Saint Macarius, in the desert of Scete, and he advanced in good
works as he became older, and his excellences increased, and he devoted himself to the
ascetic life, and fought a good fight. And he was appointed abbot in the house of Saint
Abba Macarius, and the bishops and all the people chose him, and appointed him
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And great tribulation and very much sorrow came
upon him during all the days of his office, and the Muslim kings afflicted him, and they
seized him and bound him in fetters; and they demanded money from him, but he had
nothing whatsoever to give them. And God performed through him many signs and
wonders and he healed many sick folk of grievous sicknesses, and he cast out Satans from
men. And through his prayer God sent down very much rain upon the men of the country
of Mareotis, who remained in a state of severe famine for ten years through want of rain;
482

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
for the wells in the country had dried up and the streams and they well-nigh died of thirst.
When this father came to them to celebrate a festival in the church of Saint Abba Minas,
the martyr, all the men of the city gathered together to him and told him how much they
were suffering through want of water, and he comforted them and encouraged them to be
patient. When this father had ended the Liturgy he entreated God to have mercy upon His
creation, and to teach them. When the time of sunset arrived the rain began to fall in large
drops, and then ceased. And this father said, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom belongeth
glory, O Master, if Thou wishest to teach Thy people, and to show compassion unto them
with the riches of Thy compassion, and the abundance of Thy mercies, let them be filled
and satisfied with Thy mercy, and with Thy blessing, in Thy good pleasure.” Having said
this he went into his bed-chamber to pray the prayer for sleep, and then he asked God to
remember His people, and to show mercy upon them. And when he finished his prayer,
there came mighty thunders and lightning, and the rain descended like a flood, and filled
all the holes in the ground, and the gardens, and the wells and the grounds round about
them. He remained three years in that land and was there during three years of famine. On
another occasion the Arabs of Upper Egypt assembled, and came to the desert of Scete,
and they surrounded the monasteries, and wished to kill all the monks who dwelt in them,
and to plunder the monasteries. And this holy father took his own cross, and went out
against them, and when they saw the cross in his hand, they turned backwards and did no
harm whatsoever. And this father expelled all infidelity from his country by his learning,
and also from his flock. Now at that time there were men who said that He Who suffered
for us was only a man and not God. And this father wrote a letter and sent it during the
days of the Great holy Fast (i.e. Lent) to all cities, and in it he spoke thus: “God the Word
suffered for us in His Body, and His Divine Nature was not separated from His human
nature, not for an hour, nay, not for the twinkling of an eye. These two Natures were one
from the beginning, and they were not separated in any way whatsoever by any operation;
and at the time of His Passion and Death they were not separated.” When this letter was
read in all the cities, all the Christians therein rejoiced with a great joy. And there also
appeared certain accursed men who said, now their tongues ought to be cut out! that His
Divine Nature died; these were the men of the city of Balyana, and their bishops. When
this father heard the report of them he was very sad, and he wrote other letters wherein he
said, “The Nature of God, the Word, is unknowable, and intangible, and impassable, and
suffering can only enter the human nature which God the Word took and made one with
His Godhead, without separation, and without mingling, and without change.” And he also
said therein, “We do not separate God the Word from our flesh which suffered, but we
believe that He was One at the time of His Passion, and likewise we also believe that His
Godhead neither suffered nor died, but that He suffered, and died in the flesh, only without
separation of His Godhead.” When his letters reached these men, and they had read them,
they turned from their error, and they believed in their Faith in righteousness and integrity.
And their bishops came and confessed before our father, the archbishop, the True and
Right Faith, and they entreated our father Archbishop Sanutya (Shenuti), saying, “Forgive
us our sin and error.” And this father commanded them to bow down before all the
bishops, and priests, and people, and to say unto them, “Forgive us, for we have sinned and
gone astray, for it was Satan who led us into error.” And they did as the archbishop
commanded them, and he forgave them their sins. And this father thought much about the
churches, and their buildings, and the places wherein pilgrims sojourned, and what moneys
were left him he gave to the poor and needy; and he followed a good course of life and
pleased God. And the days of his office were fifteen years, and he died in peace.
483

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Salutation to the mighty Archbishop who drove away the Enemy by the Cross which was
in his hand.
And on this day also are commemorated the consecration of Dabra Sina, and Abba
Yasdera of Sina.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Miyazia 29
(May 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Sana, the companion of Saint Isidore, whose history is told in the section
for the eighteenth day of the month of Megabit, became a martyr. After this holy man had
been tortured with his companion, Isidore [died] and received the crown of martyrdom;
and this holy man Sana remained in the prison house. And he who was governor of the
city of Farma at that time was abolished, and another governor was appointed to succeed
him; and the infidel emperor commanded that governor not to leave [alive] anyone who
mentioned the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And they told him about the fight of this
holy man Sana, and informed him that he was a captain of soldiers, and told him that he
had been tortured severely, and would not turn from his counsel. And the governor
commanded his soldiers to cut off his holy head, [and they did so,] and he received the
crown of life. And his mother saw angels of light taking his soul, and carrying it up to
heaven, and she said she had seen this when Isidore was martyred. Then they took the
body of Saint Sana, and swathed it for burial, and laid it with the body of Saint Isidore, his
friend; and their bodies remain in the city of Samnud, and the people thereof keep a great
feast in their honor. And many signs and wonders appear through them to those who go to
them in faith. Salutation to Sana and Isidore.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Sanutya (Shenuti), the fifty-fifth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This holy and spiritual father was a monk from his
early years in the church of Saint Macarius, in the desert of Scete, and he advanced in good
works as he became older, and his excellences increased, and he devoted himself to the
ascetic life, and fought a good fight. And he was appointed abbot in the house of Saint
Abba Macarius, and the bishops and all the people chose him, and appointed him
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And great tribulation and very much sorrow came
upon him during all the days of his office, and the Muslim kings afflicted him, and they
seized him and bound him in fetters; and they demanded money from him, but he had
nothing whatsoever to give them. And God performed through him many signs and
wonders and he healed many sick folk of grievous sicknesses, and he cast out Satans from
men. And through his prayer God sent down very much rain upon the men of the country
of Mareotis, who remained in a state of severe famine for ten years through want of rain;
for the wells in the country had dried up and the streams and they well-nigh died of thirst.
When this father came to them to celebrate a festival in the church of Saint Abba Minas,
the martyr, all the men of the city gathered together to him and told him how much they
were suffering through want of water, and he comforted them and encouraged them to be
484

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
patient. When this father had ended the Liturgy he entreated God to have mercy upon His
creation, and to teach them. When the time of sunset arrived the rain began to fall in large
drops, and then ceased. And this father said, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom belongeth
glory, O Master, if Thou wishest to teach Thy people, and to show compassion unto them
with the riches of Thy compassion, and the abundance of Thy mercies, let them be filled
and satisfied with Thy mercy, and with Thy blessing, in Thy good pleasure.” Having said
this he went into his bed-chamber to pray the prayer for sleep, and then he asked God to
remember His people, and to show mercy upon them. And when he finished his prayer,
there came mighty thunders and lightning, and the rain descended like a flood, and filled
all the holes in the ground, and the gardens, and the wells and the grounds round about
them. He remained three years in that land and was there during three years of famine. On
another occasion the Arabs of Upper Egypt assembled, and came to the desert of Scete,
and they surrounded the monasteries, and wished to kill all the monks who dwelt in them,
and to plunder the monasteries. And this holy father took his own cross, and went out
against them, and when they saw the cross in his hand, they turned backwards and did no
harm whatsoever. And this father expelled all infidelity from his country by his learning,
and also from his flock. Now at that time there were men who said that He Who suffered
for us was only a man and not God. And this father wrote a letter and sent it during the
days of the Great holy Fast (i.e. Lent) to all cities, and in it he spoke thus: “God the Word
suffered for us in His Body, and His Divine Nature was not separated from His human
nature, not for an hour, nay, not for the twinkling of an eye. These two Natures were one
from the beginning, and they were not separated in any way whatsoever by any operation;
and at the time of His Passion and Death they were not separated.” When this letter was
read in all the cities, all the Christians therein rejoiced with a great joy. And there also
appeared certain accursed men who said, now their tongues ought to be cut out! that His
Divine Nature died; these were the men of the city of Balyana, and their bishops. When
this father heard the report of them he was very sad, and he wrote other letters wherein he
said, “The Nature of God, the Word, is unknowable, and intangible, and impassable, and
suffering can only enter the human nature which God the Word took and made one with
His Godhead, without separation, and without mingling, and without change.” And he also
said therein, “We do not separate God the Word from our flesh which suffered, but we
believe that He was One at the time of His Passion, and likewise we also believe that His
Godhead neither suffered nor died, but that He suffered, and died in the flesh, only without
separation of His Godhead.” When his letters reached these men, and they had read them,
they turned from their error, and they believed in their Faith in righteousness and integrity.
And their bishops came and confessed before our father, the archbishop, the True and
Right Faith, and they entreated our father Archbishop Sanutya (Shenuti), saying, “Forgive
us our sin and error.” And this father commanded them to bow down before all the
bishops, and priests, and people, and to say unto them, “Forgive us, for we have sinned and
gone astray, for it was Satan who led us into error.” And they did as the archbishop
commanded them, and he forgave them their sins. And this father thought much about the
churches, and their buildings, and the places wherein pilgrims sojourned, and what moneys
were left him he gave to the poor and needy; and he followed a good course of life and
pleased God. And the days of his office were fifteen years, and he died in peace.
Salutation to the mighty Archbishop who drove away the Enemy by the Cross which was
in his hand.
And on this day also are commemorated the consecration of Dabra Sina, and Abba Yasdera of Sina.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

485

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Miyazia 30
(May 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Mark the evangelist and apostle, the first of the Archbishops of the city
of Alexandria, became a martyr. The name of the father of this holy man was
“Aristopolus,” and he was born in Cyrene (One of the Five Western Cities Pentapolis - in
North Africa), and his mother’s name was Mary, and she is mentioned in the Book of the
Acts of the Apostles. Now the name of this apostle formerly was “John,” even as saith the
Book of the Acts of the Apostles, for [it saith], “The Apostles were praying in the house of
Mary, the mother of John, who is called ‘Mark the Apostle’” (Acts xii, 12). And this
woman was rich, and she taught her son the Greek, and Hebrew languages. And when he
was grown up, he took Barnabas with him into the preaching, when he departed with Saint
Paul; and when he saw tribulation come upon them, and scourging, and disgrace in the
country of Pamphylia, he forsook them and returned to Jerusalem. When the Apostles
returned to Jerusalem, and held converse together concerning the reception of the Gentiles
into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and considered how God had worked signs and
wonders by their hands, he was sorry, and repented, because he was one of them. And he
sought to go with them, but Saint Paul did not wish to take him because he had forsaken
them, but he took Barnabas, and Saint Mark went to Saint Peter in the city of Rome, and
became his disciple. And there he wrote for himself his Gospel, and Saint Peter interpreted
(or, translated) it, and preached it in Rome; and after this he walked in the commandments
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the commandments of the holy apostles in the city of
Alexandria, and he preached therein the preaching of the Holy Gospel. And he also
preached in the country of Africa, and Berka, and Pentapolis [the Five Western cities in
North Africa]. As he was coming to the city of Alexandria, the latchet of his sandal broke
off from his foot, and when he reached the gates thereof he found a certain sandal-maker
there, and the saint gave him his sandal to repair. As he was sewing the sandal, the awl
pierced his finger, and blood ran down from it, and he said in the Greek language,
“Estaas,” which is, being interpreted, “one God”. And Saint Mark said unto him, “Dost
thou know God?” And he said unto him, “Certainly not. We utter His Name only, but we
do not know Him.” And Saint Mark began to talk to him about the beginning when God
created the heavens and the earth, and how the transgression of our father Adam took
place, and of the coming of the Flood, and how God sent Moses, who brought the children
of Israel out of Egypt, and gave them the Law, and how the children of Israel were carried
captives to the city of Babylon from Jerusalem, and how our Lord Jesus Christ became
man, and how the prophets foretold His coming. And then the saint spat in the dust, and
smeared it on the hands of the sandal-maker and he was healed straightway. Now the
name of the sandal-maker was “Anianus,” and he took Saint Mark to his house and he
brought to him his sons and kinsfolk, and Saint Mark the apostle admonished them all, and
taught them, and baptized them with Christian baptism in the Name of the Father and the
Son and the Holy Ghost. And when the believers on our Lord Jesus Christ increased, and
the men of the city heard the report of Saint Mark, they gathered together, and wished to
kill them. And Saint Mark appointed Anianus archbishop, and he made his sons priests
and deacons, and he went out to the city of Berka and to Pentapolis and preached in them,
and strengthened the people in the Faith. And he remained with them two years, and he
appointed bishops, and priests, and deacons over them, and then he returned to the city of
486

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Alexandria where the believers had increased in number. And he built a church in a place,
which is known as the “Field of Bulls,” on the shore of the sea; and the infidels sought for
Saint Mark to kill him. And he visited Pentapolis very frequently, and when he came back
he entered the city of Alexandria secretly. One year he returned from Pentapolis and came
into the church on the day of the festival of the Resurrection, which took place on the
nineteenth day of the month of Miyazya, and all the people were round about him. And
the infidels came into the church, and threw cords round the neck of Saint Mark, and
dragged him about through the city, and they said also, “Let us drag him to the church in
the ‘Field of the Bulls.’” And the blood of the saint was in every street of the city, and the
district round about it, and the ends thereof. When the night came, our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared unto him in the form which He had when He was with the Apostles, and He gave
him [the kiss of] peace, and strengthened him, and made a covenant with him, saying,
“Behold, thou art the equal of thy brethren the Apostles”; and his soul rejoiced and was
glad. And on the following day they put cords about his neck, and dragged him through
the villages, and at the end of the day he delivered up his soul; and the infidels lighted a
large fire and threw his body into it. And by the good pleasure of our Lord Jesus Christ
there came darkness, and a cold wind, and the sun hid his light, and there was lightning
and thunder and rain and hail, and the infidels fled before them. And certain believing men
came and took the body of Saint Mark, which was whole and had suffered no injury, and
they wrapped it up for burial in fine cloths, and laid it in a secret place. Salutation to
Mark, whose body was crowned with lightning, and rain, and hail.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

487

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE NINETH MONTH
Ginbot 01
(May 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the birth of our holy Lady, the pure two-fold Virgin, Mary, the
God-bearer, through whom came the salvation of the race of the children of man. Her
honored father Joachim was an old man, and had begotten no child, and he was very
sorrowful of heart because of this, for he was not able, having no children, to bring in an
offering; and his wife was barren, and there was a law of the priests that barren women
should not bring in an offering. And the righteous woman Hanna, her mother, was very
sad, because of their failure to have children. And God looked upon their thoughts, and
their good manner of life, and He, blessed be His Name, was pleased by the operation of
His wisdom, that salvation of man should come through their seed. And whilst Joachim
was standing up in the mountain, and praying at the end of the Fourth Day of the week, the
angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and told him that God would give him seed, through
which the salvation of the whole world should come. And he came down from the
mountain, and being confident, with boldness of heart, through what he had heard from the
angel of the Lord, he told his wife of the vision which he had seen, and she gave thanks to
God. And she believed that His word was true, and she vowed a vow to God that she
would give the child, which should be born, to God, to serve His house all the days of his
life. And after this, she conceived and brought forth this holy and heavenly woman, whose
name was Maryam (Mary), which is being interpreted, “Lady,” though there is another
interpretation, “Gift and grace,” and indeed she is the Lady of the entire World, and the
Queen of all women, and through her we have found heavenly grace.
Salutation to the birth of Mary.
Salutation to Bartholomew, the Crown of the Faith, who restored churches, and built one in
the name of Mary.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 02
(May 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Job, the just. This Job was just, and excellent in his days, and God
testifieth concerning him in the Holy Scriptures that there was none so just as he in his
days. And Satan was envious of him, and asked God to give him power over Job, and over
all his possessions; and God gave him power over him, for He knew the patience of Job the
just. And Job became a pattern and an example for all those who should come after him,
even as the Apostle James saith in his Epistle: “Behold, ye have heard of the patience of
488

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Job the just, and ye have seen how God behaved to this just man (James v, II); in one day
all his possessions, and his beasts, and his sons, and his daughters were destroyed.” And
this was not the only thing, for his own body [suffered], for Satan the Enemy smote him
with a smiting of sickness of boils, from his head to his foot. And during all this sickness
and severe pain he continued to endure patiently, and to give thanks to God, and on no day
did he complain, and he never blasphemed his Creator, except only when he cursed the day
on which he was born. And when all his possessions had been destroyed, and his beasts,
he said, “God gave and God hath taken, blessed be the Name of God for ever!” (Job 1:21).
And he remained in this state of tribulation for thirty years, and he lay upon a dung-hill,
and the rebukes of his friends were heavier upon him than his sickness, and the rebuke of
his wife, who advised him to blaspheme his Creator; but he neither submitted to her advice
nor listened to it. And he was tried and refined as gold is tried and refined in the fire, and
God spoke unto him from the cloud, and healed him of his sickness, and He doubled for
him his possessions and gave him other children. And he lived to a good old age, and
pleased God, and died in peace. Salutation to Job.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Theodore, the disciple of the holy father
Abba Pachomius, father of the congregation of the spirit. This holy father was an ascetic,
humble, and gentle, and a fighter, and subservient, and perfect in every kind of good work.
He became a monk with Abba Pachomius, and he was as submissive to him as to God, and
because of this Abba Pachomius loved him exceedingly; and grace was upon him, and he
was a comforter to all the brethren who were in the Society. Wisdom and understanding
were in him. Abba Pachomius set him to rebuke the brethren, and to teach them when he
was still a young man. After the death of Abba Pachomius, this father Theodore, the
companion of Abba Pachomius, was appointed Abbot of the Society in his stead. This
holy man abounded in humility, and he fled from the vainglory of this world. And he
finished his work and service, and departed to God, Whom he loved, being arrayed in the
apparel of holiness. Salutation to Theodore, the heir of Pachomius.
And on this day also twenty-two souls who were with Abba ‘Esi became martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 03
(May 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Jason, the apostle. This holy man was one of the Seventy-two
disciples whom the Lord chose. He preached with the Apostles, and he suffered the
sufferings of our Lord, and God, and Redeemer Jesus Christ. And he performed very
many signs and wonders, and power, and grace, and the Holy Spirit, Paraclete, descended
upon him, with the Apostles, on the day of the feast of Pentecost, and he became a
preacher. He was born in the city of Tarsus, and he was the first man of Tarsus who
believed. And after this he was with Saint Paul, the apostle, in the preaching, and he went
with him into many places. And they seized him, and Saint Paul, and Silas in the city of
Thessalonica, and they dragged him forth to the governor of the city of Thessalonica.
489

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
After this Saint Paul laid his hand upon him, and made him Bishop of the city of Tarsus,
and he guarded the Church of the Son of God with good and excellent care. And having
made the people thereof strong in the True Apostolic Faith, and taught them all the
Ordinances of the Church, and good works, he departed to a city of the West, and preached
the Holy Gospel unto the people thereof. And he came to an island, the name of which is
“Korekueras,” and preached therein the preaching of the Gospel; and he built therein a
church in the name of Stephen, the apostle, the archdeacon. When the governor of that city
knew this, he seized him and shut him up in the prison house, wherein he found six
thieves; and he taught them the True Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and baptized them
with Christian baptism. And they cried out boldly before the governor, saying, “We are
Christian,” and the governor cast them into a cauldron filled with [boiling] pitch and tar,
and they received crowns of martyrdom. After this he brought Saint Jason the apostle out
of the prison house, and had him tortured severely, but no harm whatsoever came to him.
And the daughter of the king saw him from the verandah of her house, and she believed on
our Lord Jesus Christ. And she brought out her raiment of fine linen, and her adornments,
and she gave them to the poor and needy, and she confessed that she was a Christian, and
she confessed the God of Saint Jason. And her father was wroth, and commanded his
soldiers to cast her into the prison house, and they did as he commanded them, and they
scourged her. Then they stripped her naked, and shot at her with arrows, and she delivered
up her soul into the hand of God. And after this he sent Saint Jason to the island, and with
him were martyrs. And the governor embarked in a ship, and there were soldiers with him,
to go and torture them there, but God made the ship to sink in the river (or, sea), and all
those who were with him, and Saint Jason gave thanks to God; and after his deliverance
the saint continued to preach, and to teach the people for many years. And another
governor was appointed, and he had Saint Jason and those who were with him brought
before him, and he filled a great cauldron with pitch and wax, and the soldiers lighted a fire
under them, and when they were melted he cast Saint Jason into the cauldron; and our Lord
Jesus Christ delivered him, and the saint suffered no injury whatsoever. When the
governor saw this, he believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and the men of his house, and all
the men of the city. And the apostle baptized them all with Christian baptism and he
taught them the precepts of the Holy Gospel, and built churches for them, and this apostle
performed many signs and wonders in them. And he died at a good old age, and with
shining face, and he pleased God. Salutation to Jason, and to the king’s daughter, and to
the thieves who believed through this saint.
And on this day also Abba Besoy became a martyr. This holy man was a native of Balget,
and [the soldiers] tortured him by twisting round his limbs and body, and [hacking at them]
with choppers. And the angel of the Lord, holding a crown in his hand, appeared unto him
and said, “Fear thou not! Here is thy crown with fire”; and thus the saint finished his good
course. Salutation to Abba Besoy, who finished his course by fire.
And on this day also are commemorated the honored Saint Eusebius the priest, and Saint
Sem (Shem) the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

490

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Ginbot 04
(May 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba John the First (?), the twenty-ninth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This holy man was one of the believing sons of the people of the city of
Alexandria, and he became a monk in his youth in the desert of Scete, in the monastery of
Saint Abba Macarius. When Abba Athanasius, the archbishop, who was his predecessor,
died, the bishops, and doctors, and all the people chose this father, and they took him by
force and against his will. Now this holy man did not wish to become archbishop, and they
made many petitions to him that he would not allow another man to be appointed over his
flock, and put them to shame. And when he saw the bishops, and the doctors, and the
chiefs of the Jews entreating him, he was afraid of them, and he said, “Peradventure this
must be the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ”; and they made him the archbishop. And
having taken his seat upon the throne of Mark the evangelist and apostle, he took thought
for his flock, and more especially concerning the teaching of them, and he read the
Scriptures to them, and strengthened them in the True Faith, and he set over them bishops,
and priests, and doctors. And the emperor who was reigning in Constantinople in those
days was Zeno, a just and believing and God-fearing man and he helped this saint, and he
stretched out his hand over many cities, and the True Faith was extended by his hand
throughout the country of Egypt. And in those days the Emperor Zeno sent to the desert of
Scete, to the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius, ships full of grain, and wine, and oil, and
many goods of all kinds, and whatsoever the monks needed for building churches and
monasteries. And all the days of the life of this father were [passed] in quietness and
peace; for God had given good will to men through the prayer and learning of this father.
And then God visited this father with a little sickness, and he died in peace, having sat for
eight years. Salutation to John, a royal kinsman, and builder of churches.
And on this day Sosima and Abba Noda (Sinoda), slaves of Victor, became martyrs.
Salutation to Sosima, and Noda (Sinoda).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 05
(May 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Jeremiah the prophet, the son of Hilkiah the priest, who was one of the
Great Prophets. This just man prophesied in the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, the King
of Judah, and Jehoiakim, the son of Zedekiah. Concerning this pure man God spoke,
saying, “I sanctified thee before thou didst come forth from thy mother’s womb, and I have
set thee to be the prophet of the Gentiles, and the rebuker of the people” (Jeremiah 1:5).
And this prophet rebuked the children of Israel because they forsook the Lord God, and
rejected the Law, and he said unto them, “Take heed and repent so that the wrath of God
may not come upon you.” And he informed them, saying, “If ye do not turn to God He
491

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
will raise up Nebuchadnezzar, King of the Chaldeans, and he shall lead you into captivity,”
and even so it came to pass for Nebuchadnezzar did carry them away captive. And he
prophesied that the people would remain in captivity for seventy years, and also
concerning the coming of our Lord and Redeemer, and concerning His Passion and the
thirty pieces of silver which Judas Iscariot took; and he prophesied concerning the going
forth of the Law of the Gospel from Zion, and many other matters. And the Jews wished
to kill him many times, and they scourged him, and shut him up in prison on several
occasions, but he prayed to God continually and made petitions to Him on their behalf.
And God said concerning them, “Pray not, neither make entreaty on behalf of this people,
and make not intercession with Me for them, for I will not hearken to thy petition for
them.” When Nebuchadnezzar carried the people away captive from Jerusalem, he did not
take Jeremiah with them, and the remnant of the people took him with them and departed
to the land of Egypt. And by his prayer God destroyed the wild beasts, and the lions,
which were in the valley of Egypt, and which used to harm the Egyptians. And having
finished the days of his prophecy and pleased God, he died in peace in the city of
Alexandria, and the Egyptians made a feast in his honor, even as at this day. Salutation to
Jeremiah, one of the Great Prophets.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 06
(May 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba Isaac the martyr, who was from the city of Defra, in the north
of Egypt. Unto this holy man the angel of the Lord appeared, in a vision of the night, and
he woke him up and said unto him, “Go thou to the city of Tuw, that thou mayest receive
the crown of martyrdom”; and he rose up to salute his father and his mother before he
departed. And they wept over him, and they would not let him go until the angel of the
Lord came a second time and brought him out from his city and took him to the city of
Gemwa Tuw. When he arrived there, he found that the governor was in the bath house, but
as soon as he came out the saint cried out boldly before him, saying, “I am a Christian. I
believe on our Lord Jesus Christ.” And the governor commanded one of his soldiers to
take Saint Isaac with him to his house, and to guard him until he came back from the city
of Nakyos. And as Saint Isaac was passing along the road with the soldier, a certain blind
man, who was sitting by the wayside, begged him, saying, “Have compassion upon me, O
saint of God, and heal my eyes.” And Saint Abba Isaac petitioned God for the blind man,
and his eyes were opened immediately. When the soldier saw this miracle he believed on
our Lord Jesus Christ, and became a Christian. And when the governor returned, the
soldier confessed the Lord Jesus Christ before him, and received the crown of martyrdom.
After this the governor tortured this saint very severely, and he sent him to the city of
Behnesa [to suffer] divers tortures. And when the saint was on the ship he begged that
someone might give him a cup of water, and a certain sailor, who was blind in one eye,
gave him a cup of water; and the saint sprinkled some of the water over him, and his eye
was opened, like its fellow. And when the men of the city of Behnesa saw the tortures
which were inflicted on Saint Abba Isaac, and the mighty signs which he performed, they
492

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
took him and carried him to the governor, and said unto him, “kill he, or send him away;
act quickly and immediately.” And straightway the governor commanded the soldiers to
cut off his head, and they cut off his head with a sword, and he received the crown of life.
And there were there certain believing men, and they lifted the body of Saint Abba Isaac
upon a wagon, and they drew it with oxen, and brought it to the city of Dafra. And when
they could not find a boat to carry it over the river, the oxen forded the river, carrying the
body of the saint upon their backs, and the believers brought it into his house. And they
pulled down the church, and built another church in his name, and they laid the body
therein, and many signs and miracles took place [there] through it. Salutation to Isaac.
And on this day also died the holy and honored father Abba Macarius, the Alexandrian
priest. This holy man lived in the days of the honorable Saint Abba Macarius the Great; he
was the father of the monastery of Scete, and performed many excellent deeds therein. It is
said of him that a gnat stung him and he killed it, and he repented and reproached himself
for having killed it. And he went down to the valley which was in the desert, and he
exposed his body to the gnats, and remained there for six months, when his body was like
unto that of a man suffering from elephantiasis. And he returned to his cell, and nobody
recognized him as Abba Macarius. One day he stood up in prayer for five days and five
nights, with his heart in heaven, until the Satans burned him. This labor, and this fight,
was the greatest of all the excellent things which he performed. One day he wanted to see
the regions which were beyond the range of his vision. And he went out into the desert,
and lived there, and wandered about for ten days, and he had with him some reeds which
he intended to place [at intervals] on the road, to serve as guide marks when he returned so
that he might not lose his way; when he drew near the place he sought, he felt weary, and
lay down to rest a little, and Satan plucked the reeds from him as he slept, and tied them
round the head of the saint. When Abba Macarius woke up from his sleep, he looked
about for the reeds and missed them, and straightway he marveled. And he heard a voice,
saying, “O Macarius, if thou hast faith put not [thy] trust in reeds, but believe that the same
pillar of cloud which guided the children of Israel will also guide thee.” And when the
saint had seen the district round about, he turned back and became thirsty on the road; and
God sent to him a she-buffalo of the desert, and he drank of her milk until he was wholly
satisfied, and returned to his cell. One day a she-wolf came to him, and seized his
garment, and pulled him along, and he followed her to her den, and she brought out her
young ones to him, and looking at them he found that their eyes were blind, and he
marveled at the sagacity of the beast. And he took the cubs in his hand, and cried out, and
spat into their eyes, and made the sign of the Life-giving Cross over them, and the cubs
were healed immediately, and they ran after their mother and sucked her milk, and they
followed her until they went into her den. And after this the wolf returned to the saint, and
brought him a sheep’s skin and he kept it by him, and slept upon it until the time of his
death. One day he changed his apparel after the manner of the laity, and he went to the
monastery of Saint Abba Pachomius, and stood for four days during the Great Fast,
without eating, or drinking, or sitting down, and he cried out “Hosanna” as he stood. And
the monks said unto Abba Pachomius, “Cast out this man from us, for he is not human.”
And Abba Pachomius said unto them, “Have patience with me until I can ask God to show
me his work”; and when he had asked God concerning him He told him that he was
Macarius the Alexandrian. And straightway Saint Abba Pachomius went to him, and with
him went all the monks, and they embraced him and were blessed by him, and they
rejoiced in him with a great joy. And when those who were magnifying themselves in the
monastery of Saint Abba Pachomius saw the grace of this Saint Abba Macarius they
493

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
became humble; and after this Macarius returned to his cell in the desert of Scete. And
when rain was withheld, and no rain fell upon the city of Alexandria, the Archbishop Abba
Timothy sent to him, and asked him to come to him to the city of Alexandria to pray with
him to God to make rain to fall, and to destroy the locusts. And he rose up and went with
the messengers to the city of Alexandria, and the people received him with great joy, and
he prayed in his heart secretly, and a great rain fell, and it continued to rain for two days
and for two nights in such torrents, that men began to think that the earth would be
destroyed by overmuch rain. And Saint Abba Macarius said unto the archbishop, “Why
did ye bring me hither?” And he answered and said unto him, “The people made us bring
thee to pray for us to God, that He might bring down the rain upon us, and that we all
might not perish.” And straightway he prayed, and the rain ceased, and the sun appeared
in the sky by the might of God. And this father performed many great and excellent
works, and God made manifest many signs and wonders by his hands, and he healed many
men in whom there were unclean spirits. And he used to say when he was performing
some good deed that men ought to know how to do the good deeds which he did now; the
good deeds which he did were innumerable. When he heard that any man did some good
deed he never slept until he had done a similar good deed. And having finished his fight,
he died in peace at a good old age; and he remained eight years without spitting on the
ground for the sake of the honor of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. And all
the days of his life were one hundred years. Salutation to Macarius the Alexandrian.
And on this day also Bandela’an (Pantleon), the father of Saint Isidore, became a martyr.
And on this day also died Amon the Just, who refused the office of bishop, saying, “It is
better for me to acquire the practice of the ascetic life.” [Wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also Saint Dilagi (Pelagia), and her four sons, whose names were Sures,
and Kherman, and Yanufa, and Santonya, became martyrs. This holy woman was strong
in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and when Arianus the governor of the city of Ensena
came, she met him, and said unto him, “O Arianus, the governor, I am a Christian, and a
believer on my Lord Jesus Christ, Who created the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and
all that therein is.” And her children also cried out boldly, saying, “We are Christians, and
followers of the Messiah.” When the governor heard this he was wroth and he cut off their
heads with the sword, and they finished their martyrdom, and delivered up their souls as
missives to our Lord Jesus Christ. Salutation of Dilagi and her children.
And on this day also died Saint Salome, the mistress of purity and holiness, and the
devotee of virginity. This holy woman came from the city of Warab; her parents were
God-fearing folk and they brought her up piously. When she grew up, a certain man
betrothed her to himself, and he brought her into the state of marriage against her will, and
he wished to have union with her, but straightway the power of God prevented him, and it
smote him in his flesh, and he was not able to approach her. And whilst matters were thus
she hid herself. And she departed by night, and was carried away by the power of God,
and she continued to go about visiting all the saints, and she asked God day and night, with
fasting and with prayer, to direct her into the right path. And God heard her petition, and
by the Divine Will she came to Dabra Libanos, and took the garb of the ascetic life, that is
to say the Law of the angels, through John Kama. And she fought many fights, which
would terrify hearts, and she followed that life of the fathers with fasting and with prayers,
and with every kind of praiseworthy gift. At length she was able to work many miracles,
494

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
even as it is written in the book describing her fight; and then she died on the sixth day of
Genbot. Salutation to Salome.
And on this day also died the holy father Dionysius who finished his fight by the edge of
the chopper, and the Samaritan woman [Pelagia]. Salutation to Dionysius, the teacher of
Isaac.
Salutation to Sinoda, the chief of the anchorites.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 07
(May 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and Apostolic Father, Abba Athanasius, the twentieth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This father was the son of heretical and pagan
parents, and whilst he was living with the boys at school who were being taught he saw the
children of the Christians performing the Ordinances of the Church as they were playing
together; and those boys made some of their number priests, and some deacons, and one of
them they made archbishop. And this father asked the Christian children to let him join
them in the game they were playing, but they stopped him and said unto him, “Thou art a
pagan, and we can have no intercourse with thee.” And he said unto them, “I will become
a Christian,” and they rejoiced in him and they said unto him, “Thou shalt become a
Christian and archbishop.” Then they placed under him a seat like a throne, and they
began to bow down before him. At that moment father Abba Alexander the archbishop
passed by, and when he saw the children playing together, he said unto those who were
with him, “This boy will assuredly be appointed to some exalted and honorable position.”
When the father of this father died, this father and his mother came to Abba Alexander, the
archbishop, and he baptized them with Christian baptism. And this father gave all his
goods to the poor and needy, and he dwelt with Abba Alexander, who taught him all the
doctrine and Law of the Church, and made him a beloved son to him; and he appointed
him deacon, and the gracious gift of the Holy Spirit was given unto him in a two-fold
measure. And when the holy father Abba Alexander died, [the bishops and priests]
appointed this father Athanasius Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. When Constantine
the righteous emperor died, and his son Constantine, who was an Arian, reigned in his
stead, the followers of Arius increased, and the emperor drove this father Abba Athanasius
from his archiepiscopate, and he placed there in his stead a certain man whose name was
“Gergyos". And this father lived in exile six years, far from his throne in the country of
the West. And there was in that place a house of idols, and many men were gathered
together therein, and he went into that house of idols, where many works of devils were
performed. And this saint entreated our Lord Jesus Christ until he overthrew that house of
idols, and converted all the men of that country, and brought them into the knowledge of
God; and after this God brought him back to the city of Alexandria, and drove out
Gergyos, the infidel Arian. And this father sat upon his archiepiscopal throne for six
years. And the Arians went to the emperor, and made false accusations against this father,
495

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and the emperor sent a judge, who seized him and shut him up in prison, with the
Archbishop of Antioch; and God sent His angel and delivered him from the prison house.
After the emperor died God set in his place his son, who was Orthodox, and he restored
this father to his archiepiscopal throne, and this father sat for twelve years in quietness and
in peace, until Saint Kewestos died. And after him Julian the infidel reigned, and he
searched for Abba Athanasius, who fled from him into Upper Egypt, and lived near
Akhmim. When God destroyed Julian, the infidel, the people searched for Abba
Athanasius, and when they found him not they went to the great father Abba Anthony, and
he told them that Athanasius was living in the city of Akhmim; and they went to him, and
brought him to this throne with great joy. And he lived in his archiepiscopal house in
safety and in peace until he died; and the days of his office was seven and forty years. And
because there had come upon this father labor and tribulation, and sorrow, and exile, he
was called “Apostolic.” At the time of his death he said, “If I have found grace and favor
with God I will bow down before Him and ask Him to overthrow the temple of Sarabil
(Serapis)”; and after the death of this father Abba Athanasius, the emperor sent and pulled
down the temple of Sarabil (Serapis). Salutation to Athanasius.
Salutation to John, whose children, like those of Abraham, were more than the stars of
heaven, and the sands of the sea.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 08
(May 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Abba John of the city of Senhut became a martyr. The name of the
father of this holy man was Macarius, and the name of his mother was Hanna. As he was
shepherding his father’s sheep, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and showed him a
crown of light, and said unto him, “Why art thou sitting down? The fight is prepared, and
the crowns are ready for those who will fight for the Name of Christ. And now, rise up
and go to the city of Atrib (Athribis), and fight for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ”;
then He gave him [the salutation of peace], and departed from him. And straightway Saint
Abba John rose up, and embraced his father and mother, and departed to the city of Atrib
(Athribis), and he found the governor was in the bath house, and he confessed before him
our Lord Jesus Christ, and proclaimed openly, “I am a Christian, and I believe on my Lord
and God Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God.” And the governor handed him over to
one of his soldiers, and commanded him to entreat him kindly, [thinking] that perhaps he
would change his mind, and be obedient to him; and then the governor departed to his
work. And the soldier took the saint and carried him to his house, and the saint performed
before him many signs and wonders, and the soldier believed on our Lord Jesus Christ.
When the governor returned from his work the soldier confessed before him our Lord
Jesus Christ, and received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And
the governor commanded his soldiers to torture Saint John severely, with every kind of
torture, and God strengthened him, and made him to endure [them]; and He sent His angel
to heal his wounds and He raised him up whole and uninjured. And after this the governor
496

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
sent him to the city of Antinoe, where the governor tortured him severely, and when he
was tired of doing this he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head; and they cut off his
holy head with the sword, and the saint received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom
of the heavens. And Saint John, who was from the city of Akpahsi, took the body of Saint
John, and swathed it for burial, and sent it to his city Senhut, and all the people went out to
receive it with joy and gladness, and with singing, and incense, and songs of praise, and
music; and they laid it in the church, and through it many signs and wonders took place.
Salutation to John.
And on this day also were crowned two hundred and twenty-four men of the Company of
John, and Lulius (Susis), and Matthias, who dwelt at Sihat. Salutation to the Company of
John.
Salutation to Dionysius, and to his children, and to his wife.
And on this day also is commemorated the Ascension of our Lord and God and Redeemer,
Jesus Christ, in the Body which He took from us, into the heavens, wherein is His Good
Father and the Holy Spirit; and this took place after He had finished the operation of His
wisdom upon earth, by His Passion, and His Death, and His Resurrection. And when forty
days were ended after His Resurrection, He ascended into the heavens, seated upon the
wings of the Cherubim, and the Seraphim, and the wings of the winds. And the prophecy
of David was fulfilled, saying, “He mounted upon the Cherubim, and did fly on the wings
of the wind” (Psalm xviii, 10). And by this Ascension those who believed on Him
understood ascension into the heavens, and into the celestial habitation; for wherever the
head is, it is meet that the members should be also. And as the old Adam dwelt first in the
inheritance of the earth, and then in the Seol, so also the second Adam dwelt in the
inheritance of the kingdom of the heavens, and sat down at the great right hand in the
heights of the heavens. And our Lord Christ did not make His Ascension to follow His
Resurrection immediately, in order that the heretics might not think and say that the
Ascension was an inferior matter; but out Lord, in the operation of His wisdom, waited
forty days after His Resurrection, and strengthened the faintheartedness of His disciples,
and made their souls to understand His Resurrection. And the prophecy of Daniel the
prophet concerning the Resurrection of our Lord was fulfilled, saying, “I saw as it were the
Son of Man coming upon the cloud of heaven until He drew near the Ancient of Days.
And He gave Him authority, and sovereignty, and honor so that every nation, and people,
and tongue should worship Him. And His authority is an everlasting authority, and His
sovereignty unending “ (Daniel viii, 13, 15), to Whom with His Good Father and the Lifegiving Holy Spirit be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Salutation to Thy Ascension to Thy
Father, Thou didst return like a warrior bringing his spoil with him. Salutation with praise,
and singing, and music, to Thy Ascension. Salutation to the Protector of Adam, Who, as
David saith, “Went up with the sound of the trumpet” (Psalm 47:5).
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Daniel, abbot of the desert of Scete. This
holy and just man was pure and perfect. And when his fame was noised abroad the lady
Anatasia came to him wearing the apparel of her exalted rank, and she became a nun, and
lived in a cell near him for eight and twenty years; and no man knew that she was a
woman. And this holy man saw a certain man whose name was Eulogius, and who worked
stones for a karat of gold each day; upon a very small portion of this he lived, and with the
remainder he fed the poor and needy, and what food they left he gave to the dogs. And he
never saved anything for the morrow. And when the holy man saw his good fight, and the
497

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
excellence of his deeds, he asked God to give Ewlhis worldly goods so that he might
increase his good works and charities therewith; and then he became surety for Eulogius.
And as Eulogius was working stone in the quarry, he found a deposit of stones of gold, and
he took them, and departed to the city of Constantinople, where he became a great officer
of the emperor; and he forsook the good trade at which he formerly worked. And when
Saint Abba Daniel heard about him, he went to the city of Constantinople, and he saw that
Eulogius had become a great officer, and that he rode a horse with great pride, and that
many soldiers surrounded him, and that he had abandoned his good trade. Then the saint
saw a vision wherein our Lord Jesus Christ was sitting and judging men, and He
commanded [His angels] to hang Saint Abba Daniel, and they demanded from him the soul
of Eulogius; and he saw how our Lady Mary entreated our Lord Jesus Christ on his behalf.
And straightway the holy man awoke from his sleep, and he returned to his monastery and
entreated God on behalf of Eulogius, that He would bring him back to his former state of
poverty. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and rebuked him for daring [to
interfere with] God concerning His judgment of His creation. And after this the Emperor
Constantine died, and another emperor reigned in his stead; and he rose up against
Eulogius, and took away all his goods, and wanted to kill him. And Eulogius fled from
him in order to save his life, and he came to his native city, and worked stone in the quarry
as formerly. And Saint Abba Daniel came back to him, and told him how one had hanged
him instead of him in the vision, and how one had demanded his soul from him. And the
spirit of prophecy was upon this holy man, and God made manifest many signs and
wonders through him. And when the heretics tried to make him to go forth from the True
Faith he refused, and he seized the roll wherein was [written] the [unclean] Faith and tore it
up; and the officer of the emperor punished him very severely. And after this when God
willed to give him rest, He sent to him His angel who informed him of the time of his
departure from this world; and he gathered together the monks, and commanded them, and
strengthened them, and comforted them, and he died in peace. Salutation to Daniel who
gave sight to the blind when they washed in the water wherein he had bathed his feet.
And on this day also Saint Maximus, the fighter, became a martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 09
(May 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the pure and holy woman, the Empress Helena. This holy woman
belonged to the people of the city of Roha (Edesa); her parents were Christians, and they
brought her up carefully and piously, and they taught her the learning of books, and the
doctrine of the Church. She was exceedingly beautiful, and the beauty of her soul (or,
mind) exceeded the beauty of her body. In those days Konesta the King of Barntya
(Byzantium) came to the city of Roha (Edessa), and he heard the story of the virtues of this
holy woman, and that she was beautiful in her person, and he sought her out and married
her, and he begot by her the Emperor Constantine, the first of the Christian emperors. And
she brought him up very carefully and she taught him philosophy and science. When he
498

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
became emperor, Helena saw in a dream as if one said unto her, “Go to Jerusalem and lay
bare the Cross, and the beautiful holy places”; and she told her son what she had seen.
And he sent soldiers with her to Jerusalem, and she searched for the wood of the Cross,
which giveth life, until she found it; and she found the two crosses whereon the two thieves
were crucified. And she wished to know which was the Cross of our Lord Christ, and
Saint Mark, Bishop of Jerusalem, told her that it was the Cross over the head of which was
the writing which said, “This is Jesus, the King of he Jews.” And then she wished to see a
miracle [wrought] by it so that her heart might be glad. At that moment, by the Will of
God, our Lord Jesus Christ, she had a dead man brought, and laid upon those two crosses,
but the dead man did not rise up; then she had the dead man laid upon the Cross of our
Redeemer, and straightway he rose up. And her faith and her joy were increased thereby.
At that same time she decided to build the holy churches which are mentioned in the
section for the twenty-sixth day of Meskaerem, and then she gave much money to Abba
Macarius so that he might build churches, and all the shrines. And she took the Honorable
Cross and the nails, and returned to Constantine her son, and gave them to him, and she
rejoiced; and the emperor rejoiced with a very great joy, and he embraced the Honorable
Cross and honored it exceedingly. And he made for it a case of gold, decorated with pearlstones, and he took the nails and worked some of them into his helmet, and some of them
he placed in the bridle of his horse, in order that might be fulfilled that which was written,
saying, “Salvation shall be in the bridle of the king.” And this saint fought a good fight,
and she endowed churches and monasteries largely and provided means whereby the poor
and needy were to be fed and clad; and all her days were eighty years, and she died in
peace. Salutation to Helena.
And on this day also are commemorated Baydar, and Sylvanus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 10
(May 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day are commemorated the righteous and honorable saints, the Three Children,
Ananiah, Azariah, and Misael. These saints were the sons of Jehoiakim, the King of
Judah, and Daniel was the son of their sister, and Jehoiakim and his sons were carried off
captives to Babylon. And the king chose from among his captives young men of the sons
of the children of Israel, of goodly appearance, to feed and educate, so that he might make
them officers in his army, and among those whom he chose were these just men, and
Daniel, the son of their sister. Now these righteous men did not want to eat alien food, but
the food which the children of Israel ate; and they asked the chief officer to give them
permission not to eat food made of flesh, but to give them pottage and herbs. And the
chief officer said unto them, “[If I do] I am afraid that I shall change the goodly appearance
of your persons, and be destroyed by the king”; and they answered and said unto him,
“Give us a trial, and if our persons remain goodly in appearance, well, and if they do not,
then do what thou wishest.” And then they lived upon pottage, and their faces shone, and
were exceedingly godly in appearance, by the grace of God. And the king loved them very
499

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
much, and appointed them governors over all the land of Babylon. And when the king
made an image of gold, he commanded all men to worship it, and when the Three Holy
Children would not bow down to it, those who were envious of them laid information
against them before the king. And Nebuchadnezzar had them brought before him and he
questioned them about it, and they confessed before him, saying, “We will not bow down
to the image of gold which thou hast made.” And the king was wroth, and he commanded
his soldiers to cast them into a furnace (or, oven) which was heated, [and they did so]; and
God sent His angel who extinguished the fire and made the flame of fire to be like cool
dew at the dawn of day, after the flame had risen to a height of nine and forty cubits, and
had consumed those who were outside the furnace. And the fire did not injure the Three
Holy Children in the least degree. When the king saw this he believed on the God of
heaven, and he added to their honor and to the height of their position, and he promoted
them in their offices. And when the tenth day of Genbot came, and they were praying in
their cell, having bowed down they delivered their souls into the hand of God. And at that
moment there was a great earthquake in the city of Babylon, and Nebuchadnezzar was
afraid, and asked Daniel the prophet about it, saying, “Why hath this great earthquake
taken place?” And Daniel made known to the king, saying, “It is because these Three Holy
Children have died.” And one came to the king . . . and the king sorrowed for them with a
great sorrow, and he commanded [his men] to make three coffins of the bones of the
rhinoceros, and they swathed the Three Children in silks and in cloths worked with gold,
and they laid the saints [in the coffins] and did as the king commanded. And he also
commanded [his men] to make for him a coffin of gold, so that when he died they might
place his body therein, and lay it with the bodies of the saints; and even so it was [done].
And in the days of the father Abba Theophilus, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, they
built a church in their name, and he wished to make men bring their bodies to that church,
[from Babylon]; and he sent Abba John, the Short, to make them bring their bodies. And
when John came into the city of Babylon he saw the rivers thereof, but there was no one at
all in it; and the image of gold rested there. And the angel of the Lord brought him to the
bodies of the saints, and the body of the king was lying with them; and he bowed down
before the bodies of the saints. And he prayed and wept, saying, “O my holy fathers, our
father Abba Theophilus the archbishop hath built a church in your names, and he wisheth
to bring your bodies into it; and he hath sent me [to effect this].” And a voice went forth
from their bodies, saying, “God give thee a reward for thy labor. Say thou to the father of
the Faith, Abba Theophilus, that God hath commanded us not to let our bodies be
separated from the body of this king until the Day of Judgment. But we do not wish that
his labor should be wasted. Tell him to command lamps to be suspended in the church on
the night of the festival of its dedication, and let the servants put no oil therein; and they
shall not light [the wicks], and we will come into the church and make manifest our power
therein.” And when Abba John, the Short, returned to the archbishop, he told him
everything, and what they said to him, and what they commanded him to do; and the
archbishop did as the Three Holy Children commanded. And on the night of the tenth day
of the month of Genbot, the saints appeared in the church, and lighted the lamps with fire.
And the archbishop and those who were worthy saw the Three Holy Children going round
about the church, and a very large number of sick folk were straightway healed of their
sicknesses, whatsoever the sickness of each of them might be, by the Three Holy
Children. Salutation to the Three Children who on the night of the dedication of their
church in Alexandria lighted the lamps, which had been hung up therein without any oil in
them.
500

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also are commemorated Thecla the martyr, and Paula.
And on this day also died Abraham, the artisan. This saint was a man from the city of
Markyas (Marcia), and from the monastery, which was called the monastery of the martyr
Theodore. And the mother of the child gave him to the teacher so that he might learn the
Faith of our Lord Christ; and God opened the eyes of his heart, and he learned all the Law
of the Church, and began to fast and to pray. When he was nine years old, he learned the
craft of the stone cutter, and he made stone bases, and water troughs (?), whereby he made
much money; and he gave alms to the poor and needy. One night when he was praying, he
remembered the end of the world, and of all that is therein, and he wished to become a
martyr for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And straightway the angel of the Lord
appeared unto him, and gave him the salutation of “Peace,” and he said unto him, “Be
strong and fear not, for thou shalt overcome thine enemy and shalt receive the crown of
martyrdom.” Then he went to the church of Saint Theodore, and received Christian
baptism, and he stood up before the picture of the saint, and he prayed for a long time, and
committed himself to his care; then he departed to the governor and confessed that he was
a Christian. And straightway the governor tied his hands behind his back with heavy
pieces of wood attached, and then threw him out in the sun [to suffer] hunger and thirst.
And at midnight our Lord appeared unto him, and gave him the promise concerning the
man who should call upon his name, or celebrate his commemoration. Then the governor
commanded his soldiers to cut off his head, and when they cut off his head, it flew up in
the air above the people assembled there, and cried out three times, “I am a Christian”; and
it went a distance of fifty cubits and fell into the river. Then they slit open his belly, and
filled it with pitch, and bitumen, and boiling oil, and cast his body into a red-hot furnace,
and it suffered no injury whatsoever. Then they cut the body into small pieces, and put
them into a basket, and cast them into the river, and by the Will of God his body appeared
at the edge of the city of Esna, with its head joined thereto; and certain believing men took
it, and buried it with great honor. Salutation to Abraham.
And on this day also is celebrated the consecration of the church of Abba Misael. The
parents of this saint were rich Christians, and as they lacked a son they prayed to God for
one, and they begot this saint; and when he grew up they taught him the Books of the
Church. When his parents died, the bishop of the city took care of him. When the boy was
twelve years old he remembered the end of the world, and he went to the monastery of
Abba Isaac, and asked the abbot to be allowed to become a monk; and after Abba Isaac had
tried him, and seen his holiness, he made him a monk. And the grace of the Holy Spirit
descended upon him, and he devoted himself so greatly to fasting and prayer, that the light
of his face was changed, and his body became like dry wood. One day he went into the
cell of Abba Isaac, and when the abbot saw that his face had become like that of a dead
man, he wept and said unto him, “How didst thou destroy thyself in this fashion?” And the
holy Abba Misael (Michael ?) said unto him, “Weep not, O my father, for God hath not
forsaken me, and my strength is not exhausted by standing up; but this I will tell thee. I
saw in my dream as it were envoys of the emperor coming to thee from Alexandria, and
seeking for me; do not prevent them, so that they may not harm thee. And in the coming
year a great famine shall take place, and lay waste the land; gather together food for thy
children.” And after a few [days] men came in the form of soldiers of the emperor, and
they seized Abba Isaac whilst seeking for Misael (Michael ?), and when they knew which
was he, they took him with them, and they left the monks sorrowing. When the famine
came, and the governor [knew] that there was food in that monastery he wished to attack
501

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
[the monks therein]. And Abba Isaac went out in order to make entreaty to him, and
immediately there came forth from the desert many soldiers with swords and drove away
the governor. And whilst Abba Isaac was wondering about these men, Abba Misael
(Michael ?) came to him, and revealed himself to him, and told him that these men were
soldiers of heaven, and that the city whereto they had taken him was the heavenly
Jerusalem. And then he commanded them to build a church for him in the form of his cell,
and they consecrated it, as it were this day. And Abba Misael (Michael ?) appeared to
Abba Isaac, and told him that he would die the following year, and so it happened, even
according to his word. Salutation to Abba Misael (Michael ?).
And on this day also three hundred and fifty-eight people were martyred with Abba Nob.
And on this day also died John, the patriarch. Salutation to John the patriarch, who labored
at dawn, and fought at even (i.e. performed manual labor by day, and contended with
devils during the night).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 11
(May 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Theocleia, the wife of Saint Justus, became a martyr. After the governor of the
city of Alexandria had caused them to be separated from each other, even as it is written in
the section for the tenth day of Yakatit, he took Saint Theocleia to the city of Dha. And
when the governor of the city of Alexandria had read the letter before the governor of her
city, he marveled and said, “Why have they left their kingdom and chosen death rather
than their kingdom?” And the governor urged her with many words of persuasion, and
promised her great things, but she answered and said unto him, “I have left my kingdom
and I will not return unto it, I am well pleased at my separation from the husband of my
youth, and I am comforted for my children by the love of my Lord Jesus Christ, and what
couldst thou give me [in place thereof]?” And the governor commanded his soldiers to
beat her, and they beat her until the skin was stripped off her body, and after this they cast
her into the prison house; and the angel of the Lord appeared unto her and healed her
wounds. And when the prisoners and the other people saw her, many of them marveled,
and believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and became martyrs. And when the time of the
death of Saint Theocleia drew nigh, the angel of the Lord appeared unto her, and
comforted her and promised her many things. Then the governor commanded the soldiers
to cut off her head with the sword, and they cut off her head with the sword and she
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And certain believing
men came and gave silver to the soldiers, and they took her holy body, and swathed it for
burial in costly cloths and laid it in a coffin until the end of the days of the persecution.
Salutation to Theocleia.
And on this day also is the commemoration of Saint Pafnotyos (Paphnutius), the bishop.
This father became a monk in his youth, in the desert of Scete, in the monastery of Abba
Macarius, and he fought a great fight and performed many works of ascetic virtue. He
502

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
fasted very often, and never ate food cooked by fire, and ate only dried herbs. And he
learned in the desert the knowledge of the Canon, [and] the Scriptures, and the Law of the
Church, and he was appointed priest. He lived in the desert for five and thirty years, and
the report of him and his righteousness was noised abroad. And Abba Philotheus,
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, sent and had him brought to him, and made him a
bishop. When he was appointed bishop he never changed his apparel, except when he
wished to officiate at the Offering, and then he wore the vestments of a priest; and when he
had finished the office of the Offering he put on his sackcloth again. And his spiritual
fighting and asceticism were so intense, now he followed the canon of the ascetic life all
day long, that his body languished, and he prayed to God, saying, “O my Lord Jesus
Christ, unto Whom praise belongeth, wilt Thou withhold Thy grace from me because of
my office of bishop?” And the angel of the Lord came and said unto him, “Know thou that
when thou wast in the desert thou hadst none near thee to visit thee in the time of thy
sickness, and there was none to minister unto thee, and thou wast not able to find relief
from thy sickness, and it was God Who removed sickness and toil from thy body. And
behold, thou art now here in the world, and thou hast near thee those who can minister unto
thee and visit thee; and thou canst obtain relief from thy sickness, and canst attend to
thyself as thou wishest.” And this father sat in his office of bishop for two and thirty years,
and when the time of his death drew nigh he summoned the priest, and the chief Jews and
the deacons, and he handed over to them the sacred property of the churches, and all their
possessions, and he said unto them, “Behold, know ye that I am departing to God, and ye
know that I have walked in your midst in a manner which was befitting. And our Lord
Jesus Christ, before Whom I am about to stand, will be witness for me, that I have not
taken for myself one silver drachma of all the money which came to me to the bishop’s
office.” And they embraced him and wept and asked him to bless them, and not to forget
to help them; and he blessed them, and said unto them, “God bless you and make you
strong in the True Faith until ye draw your last breath”; and thus saying he fell asleep and
died in peace. Salutation to Pafnotyos (Paphnutius), the bishop.
And on this day also became a martyr Abba Asher, the teacher of Bali, as he was going
down to Jerusalem in the time of Wanag Sagad (died A.D. 1540) the king. He worshipped
before they cut off his head with the sword, and afterwards they burnt him in the fire, at the
gates of Jerusalem, at the place where the foot of our Lord stood.
And on this day also died Yared, the poet and hymn writer, who was like unto the
Seraphim. This man was a kinsman of Abba Gideon a priest of ‘Aksum, which city held
the first church that was built in the country of Ethiopia, and in [this church] was first
preached the Faith of our Lord Christ, and it was consecrated (i.e. dedicated) in the name
of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer. When this Abba Gideon began to
teach the blessed Yared the Psalms of David, he was unable to keep him with him for
many days at a time, and then when he beat him, and made him to suffer pain, he fled into
the desert and took up his abode under a tree. And he saw a worm (caterpillar ?) which
was climbing up the tree, and when it had climbed up half way it fell down upon the
ground; and this it did many times, because of the difficulty of climbing the tree. And
when Saint Yared saw the perseverance (?) of the worm, he repented in his soul and
returned to his teacher and said unto him, “Forgive me, O father, and dispose of me as thou
wishest.” And his teacher, a spiritual man, received him, and having asked God with tears
He opened the thoughts of Yared’s understanding, and he learned in one day the Books of
the Old and the New Testaments; and then he was made a deacon. Now in those days
503

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
there was no singing of hymns and spiritual songs in a loud voice to well-defined tunes,
but men murmured them in a low voice. And God, wishing to raise up to Himself a
memorial, sent unto him three birds from the Garden of ‘Edom, and they held converse
with Yard in the speech of man, and they caught him up, and took him to the heavenly
Jerusalem, and there he learned the songs of the Four and Twenty Priests of heaven. And
when he returned to himself, he went into the First Church in ‘Aksum, at the third hour of
the day, and he cried out with a loud voice, saying, “Hallelujah to the Father, Hallelujah to
the Son, Hallelujah to the Holy Spirit.” The first Hallelujah he made the foundation, and
called it “Zion.” In the second Hallelujah he showed forth how Moses carried out the work
of the Tabernacle, and this he called a “Song of the heights.” And when they heard the
sound of his voice, the king, and the queen, and the bishop, and the priests, and the king’s
nobles, ran to the church, and they spent the day in listening to him. And he arranged
hymns for each season of the year, for summer and winter, and spring and autumn, and for
festivals and Sabbaths, and for the days of the Angels, the Prophets, the Martyrs and the
Righteous, in three modes, that is to say, the first mode to be used on ordinary days, the
second mode to be used on fast days and days of mourning, and the third mode to be used
on the great festivals. And there were not lacking (?) in these three modes any of the
sounds that are made by men, and birds, and beasts. One day whilst Saint Yared was
singing by the footstool of King Gebre Meskel, the king (died A.D. 1344) was so deeply
absorbed [in listening to] his voice, that he drove his spear into the flat part of Yared’s foot
with such force that much blood spurted out; but Saint Yared did not know of it until he
had finished his song. And when the king saw this he was dismayed, and he drew his
spear out of his foot, and said unto him, “Ask me what ever reward thou wishest for in
return for this thy blood which hath been shed”; and Saint Yared said unto him, “Swear to
me that thou wilt not refuse me.” And when the king had sworn Saint Yared said unto
him, “Send me away that I may become a monk.” When the king heard this he was
exceedingly sad, and his nobles likewise, but he was afraid to prevent him because of his
oath. And when Saint Yared had gone into the church, he stood before the Tabernacle of
Zion, and when he had said the prayer from the beginning, “Holy, and honorable, and
glorious, and blessed, and praised, and exalted” to the end thereof, he was raised above the
ground the space of a cubit. Then he departed to the desert of the south, and he lived there
in fasting and prayer; and he mortified his flesh exceedingly, and finished his strife there.
And God gave him the promise concerning the man who should invoke his name or
celebrate his commemoration; and he died in peace and the place of his grave in the south
is not known to this day. Salutation to Yared.
And on this day also died the blessed woman Arsema. This holy woman became a nun in a
house of virgins, and pretended to be mad, and during the night she afflicted herself, and
tortured her flesh with fasting and prayer. And when anyone looked at her, she pretended
to be asleep; and the widows hated her and reviled her. And God revealed her spiritual
fight to Abba Daniel, and when he arrived in the mountain of the widows he told the
abbess all her virtues, and she told the widows, one by one, and from that day they treated
her with honor. And, hating vain praise, she fled and went into the desert secretly, leaving
behind her with one of them a writing wherein she praised them for having treated her with
contumely, and there she died.
And on this day also Saint Euphemia became a martyr in the reign of Diocletian. The
name of her mother was Theodoriasiana, and she was a God-fearing woman and a believer
on our Lord Jesus Christ. And Satan urged Antiopatus to compel all the Christians to
504

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
worship idols, and he had her, and many other Christians with her, brought to him, and he
said unto her, “Sacrifice to the gods.” And Saint Euphemia said unto him, “I will worship
my Lord Jesus Christ only, and I am strong of heart in the Holy Spirit that I may find the
hope of my Father.” Then was Antiopatus wroth, and he commanded his soldiers to cast
her under the wheels of a wagon (?), so that it might break her body and each of her
members; and the angel of the Lord came from heaven and delivered her. And then he
commanded them to light a fire [and to feed it] until its flames rose up to a height of five
and forty cubits, and to throw her into it. And she stood up in the midst of the fire and
prayed, and as she prayed she went forth from the fire uninjured; and then they cast her
into the prison house until the morning. And on the following day they brought her before
the Council, and the governor said unto her, “Sacrifice to the gods.” And the saint laughed
and said unto him, “I will not sacrifice to these dumb stones.” When Antiopatus heard her,
he commanded the soldiers to bring four stones wherein were set instruments for flaying
the saint. And then he commanded them to cast her into a tank of water wherein were
savage creatures (crocodiles ?), and these creatures carried her and lifted her above the
water, and set her outside the tank. And then he ordered them to place under the dust of
the ground sharp stones and swords, and to make her to run backwards and forwards over
them, so that she might fall down and die, but when she had run over them she remained
uninjured. And then he commanded them to beat her, and to cast her into a cauldron to
boil her, but she suffered no injury whatsoever. And then they gathered together wild
beasts and bears, and set them at her, but the lions kissed her feet, though one savage beast
in evil nature bit her foot. And a voice came from heaven, saying, “Ascend, O Euphemia,
and come into the holy place,” and thus she finished her martyrdom. And her father
Philophilus and her mother came, and swathed her body for burial and buried her in a new
tomb. Salutation to Euphemia who finished her course through a bite of a wild beast.
Salutation to the companions of Euphemia, Sosthenes, and Yeketras.
And on this day also became martyrs Saint Sophia, the mother of Saint Isidore, and his
sister Euphemia.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Bakimos, and Abladen (Ablanius), and
Julius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 12
(May 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day God sent Michael, the archangel, to Habakkuk, the prophet, in the city of
Jerusalem, as he was carrying a mess of lentils, meaning to take it to the reapers in the
fields. And Saint Michael seized Habakkuk by the hair, as he was carrying the food, and
he brought him to the city of Babylon forthwith, and Daniel ate of the food. And Saint
Michael, the glorious angel, delivered Daniel from the lions’ den, and he brought back
Habakkuk to the land of Judea, and the food with him, and straightway he stood by the
reapers. For this reason the doctors of the Church have commanded us to make a festival
505

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
in honor of this glorious angel Saint Michael, the archangel, on the twelfth day of the
month of Genbot. Salutation to Saint Michael.
And on this day died the glorious father John the Mouth of Gold (i.e. Chrysostom). This
saint was of the men of Antioch, and his father, whose name was Sifandus (Secundus), was
one of the rich men of that city, and the name of his mother was Athanasia (Anthusa).
Both parents were exceedingly rich, and they brought up this holy son carefully and
piously, and they taught him all learning and philosophy. And he went to the city of
Athens and learned all the wisdom of the Athenians in the House of the Learned, and he
excelled many in his knowledge and wisdom. Then he became a monk in his early years,
and rejected the delights of this fleeting world. And Saint Basil had become a monk in that
monastery before him, and they became close friends, and performed many works of
excellence together. When his father and his mother died, he did not take any of his
property, which they had left him, but he distributed it all among the poor and needy.
Then he devoted himself to the career of the ascetic, and he fought a great spiritual fight.
And there was in the monastery a certain just man, of restrained nature, a Syrian, whose
name was Sisikos, and he was a perfect monk and could see visions by the Holy Spirit.
One night whilst this man was keeping vigil and praying, he saw Peter and John the
apostles come to John, the Mouth of Gold (i.e. Chrysostom), and Saint Peter gave him keys
and Saint John the evangelist gave him a Gospel, and they said unto him, “Fear not.
Whomsoever thou bindest shall be bound in heaven, and whomsoever thou loosest shall be
loosed in heaven. We know, O thou second Daniel, that the Holy Spirit hath taken up its
abode in thee, and we have been sent unto thee by the Great Teacher, our Lord Jesus
Christ. I am Peter unto whom hath been given the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
behold, I have given the keys of the churches which are in all the ends of the world.” And
the other apostle said unto him, “I am that John who spoke in the beginning of my
preaching in the Gospel, and I said, In the beginning was the Word, and that Word was
with God, and God was that Word, and that Word is like a fiery sword against our
enemies. And thou also, unto thee it is given by God, our Lord Jesus Christ, to know that
in truth thou must bring up the nations in the True Faith.” And when that righteous man
Sisikos saw this vision, he knew that Saint John was to be appointed to be a good and
faithful shepherd. And then the grace of God descended upon Saint John, and he
composed many Discourses and admonitory Exhortations, and he interpreted the Book of
the Law (Pentateuch) whilst he was a deacon. And as Saint John was praying one night,
suddenly the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in apparel as white as snow, and when
the saint saw him he was afraid, and fell upon the ground, and was dismayed. And when
the angel of the Lord saw that he was afraid, and had fallen down, he changed his
appearance and his form became that of a man, and he said unto him, “Rise up, and fear
not, O my beloved, thou second Daniel.” And the saint strengthened his heart, and rose up,
and said unto him, “Who art thou, my lord, for thine appearance terrifieth me?” And he
said unto him, “I am the angel of the Lord, and I have been sent unto thee to strengthen
thee, and to tell thee what it is seemly for thee to do, what the Lord my God hath
commanded me. And now, be of good courage, for thy voice shall penetrate to the end of
the world, and thousands of thousands shall hear thy teaching, and shall come back to God,
and shall be saved; and thou thyself shalt become a great and strong pillar in the city of the
kingdom of the heavens. And behold, the Archbishop of the city of Antioch shall come
unto thee, and with him shall come all the priests and deacons of the Church, each in his
grade; go thou with them and whatsoever he shall command thee that do, for it is God Who
hath commanded thee this, and it is not meet for thee to transgress the commandment of
506

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
God.” And after this the angel of the Lord appeared unto the archbishop, Abba Philotheus,
and commanded him to appoint Saint John a priest. And on the following day the
archbishop came, and with him were all the priests, and he took this father and made him a
priest against his will. And when the Archbishop of the city of Constantinople died, the
Emperor Arcadius sent and brought Saint John, and appointed him Archbishop of the city
of Constantinople. And he went to his archiepiscopal office like the Apostles, and he
taught the people frequently the Life-giving Doctrine, and admonished them often, and
expounded to them the Books of the Church [and] the Old and New Testaments. And he
composed many Homilies, and he rebuked many sinners, and was afraid neither of the
emperor nor of his high officers of state. And the Empress Eudoxia, the wife of Arcadius,
was a lover of money, and she took a garden belonging to a certain widow from her by
force, to add to the grounds of the palace. And the widow came to Saint John and told him
how the Empress Eudoxia had taken her garden, and Saint John sent to the Empress
Eudoxia, and rebuked her, and entreated her with many entreaties to give back to the
widow her garden; but when she refused to obey his request, he excommunicated her, and
forbade her to enter the church or to partake of the Holy Mysteries. And fury entered her
soul and she gathered together the company of the bishops whom John had
excommunicated, and cut off from their sees, because of their evil deeds and sins, and they
wrote letters, and made common cause against Saint John in order that he might be exiled,
and the empress exiled him to the Island of ‘Akratao. When he arrived there he found that
the men of that island were heretics, and that they walked in the way of evil deeds. And
Saint John rebuked them, and taught them, and turned them from the path of error, and
brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ by means of the signs and miracles,
which he wrought before them. When Honorius, Emperor of Rome, and Yonaknidos
(Innocent) Konifanyos, Archbishop of the city of Rome, heard of the exile of Saint John,
they sorrowed exceedingly, and they sent letters to Arcadius, scolding him. And they said
unto him, “Take heed to this wicked act which thou hast committed. If thou dost not obey
us, and dost not bring back Saint John from his exile, there shall certainly not be peace
between us and thee from this time forward.” When Arcadius read their letters he was
exceedingly sad, and he made his wife, the Empress Eudoxia, to stand aside. And he
brought Saint John from exile; and when he arrived all the people of the city of
Constantinople rejoiced with an exceedingly great joy. And after a few days the Empress
Eudoxia returned, and exiled him a second time to the Island of Akratys, and he died on
the Island. And when Honorius, the just emperor, and Yonakendinos (Innocent), the
archbishop, knew that [the empress] had exiled Saint John [a second time], they were
exceedingly sorry, and the archbishop sent a letter to the Empress Eudoxia, and
anathematized her, and banned her from receiving the Holy Mysteries until she brought
back Saint John from exile. Then straightway she sent [messengers] to the Island of
‘Atrakya to bring back Saint John from the Island, and they found that he was dead; and
they took his body and brought it to the city of Constantinople. And they sent messengers
to Abba Yonakendyos (Innocent), Archbishop of the city of Rome, and informed him that
Saint John had died on the Island, and how they had brought his body to the city of
Constantinople. And he sent a second time, and anathematized the Empress Eudoxia, and
prohibited her from receiving the Holy Mysteries, and from entering a church for eight
months; but they entreated him very urgently, and he sent and removed the ban.
Nevertheless God afflicted her with a very serious illness, and she gave much money to the
physicians, but she was not healed of her disease until she went to the body of Saint John,
and bowed down before it. And she wept and entreated him to forgive her the sin, which
507

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
she had committed against him, and Saint Abba John had compassion upon her, and healed
her of her disease. And God made manifest very many signs and wonders through the
body of this Saint Abba John. And as concerning why Saint Abba John was called “Mouth
of Gold,” it is said that he was sitting one day with the Emperor Arcadius, who had his
nobles with him, and the Emperor Arcadius said unto my father Abba John, “I want to ask
thee to explain to me a passage which hath been in my mind for many days. It is this:
Why doth John the evangelist say in the Holy Gospel, that Joseph did not know our holy
Lady the Virgin Mary, until she had brought forth her first-born Son; did he know her as
men usually know women?” And Saint John answered him, saying, “It is not thus, O
Emperor, but when our Lord Jesus Christ was in the womb of our holy Lady the Virgin
Mary, she used to change her appearance day by day, and at one time her person used to
shine with great light, and Joseph did not know her understanding until she brought forth
our Lord and Redeemer Christ. When she had brought forth our Lord and Redeemer Jesus
Christ he knew the appearance of her person.” And there was in the emperor’s chamber a
picture of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, which was painted in gold, and
a voice came forth from it, saying, “Thou hast well said, O John, thou Tongue of Gold”;
and when the emperor, and his nobles, and the officers of his army heard this, they
marveled exceedingly and praised God. And thereupon the emperor gave the command,
and one brought a skilled worker in metals, and he made a tongue of gold for the holy and
honored John, and he hung it by the picture of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the Godbearer, so that it might be a sign for everyone to see. And the emperor commanded that
men should call Saint John “Tongue of Gold,” and because of this Saint John is called
“Tongue of Gold” to this very day. Salutation to John who preferred exile to partaking the
Offering with an empress who loved violence.
Salutation to the companion of Jesus and His Passion, whose name was Isakos.
And on this day also appeared in mid-heaven, the Cross of Light above Golgotha, in the
city of Jerusalem, when the holy father Abba Cyril was appointed Bishop of Jerusalem, in
the days of the kingdom of Constantine the Less, the son of Constantine the Great. And it
appeared at the sixth hour of the day, and it remained steadily in its position, and its light
outshone the light of the sun, and it continued to be visible until the ninth hour; and
everyone came from every country to see it. And Abba Cyril sent a letter to the Emperor
Constantine, saying, “Know, O emperor, that in the days of thy glorious father,
Constantine the Just, a cross appeared, which was like unto the stars of heaven, and in thy
days also, O emperor, there hath appeared a cross of light above Cranium (i.e. Golgotha),
and the light thereof outshineth the sun, and it extendeth as far as the holy tomb of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and as far as the Mount of Olives.” And he said [also] in this letter,
“Beware, O emperor, of the Faith of the wicked Arius, and trust not, and receive not, any
of those who believe in his wicked Faith.” And Saint Abba Cyril made a great festival on
the day whereon this glorious cross appeared, and he ordained that the festival should be
kept on this day, and it is meet for us [to keep it]. And he wrote it in the Exposition of
Jerusalem, and similarly all Christian people everywhere have written it down, and they
keep the festival this day, even as we always keep the festival of the Honorable Cross. For
it is our salvation, and it is [our] armor against all our enemies, both those, which are secret
and those, which are visible, provided that we take refuge therein in True Faith. Salutation
I cry with perpetual voice to the Cross, which appeared this day above Golgotha.
And on this day also are commemorated the martyrs Minas, the deacon, and Stephen.
508

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died Jared, the son of Mahalaleel. After he had lived one hundred
and sixty-two years, he begot Enoch; and his days were nine hundred and sixty and two
years. He died on Friday at the third hour.
And on this day also took place the translation of the body of the glorious father, and
teacher of the world, and head of all the monks, our father Abba Tekle Haimanot, the equal
of the angels, and the apostles, and the martyrs; and the cause of its translation was thus.
When the period of time had expired which God announced to him, saying, “After six and
fifty years they shall translate thy body from thy cave to the shrine which they shall build
for thee,” forthwith signs and wonders took place, and the blind [were made] to see, and
the lame walked. These things happened in the days of Abba Hezekiah, the inheritor of his
throne, and the day was the twelfth of Genbot. Salutation to Tekle Haimanot, for when a
blind woman, who held in her hand a bread-cake of the festival of his commemoration,
touched her eyes therewith, she was able to see the light.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 13
(May 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, the ascetic, and fighter, and wise man Arsenius. This
saint was of the men of Rome, and he belonged to a rich and noble family, and [his
parents] taught him the doctrine of the Church, and they made him a deacon. And after
this he went to the city of Athens, and he studied and learned philosophy, and astronomy,
and all the paths of the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and their times; and he became
exceedingly learned, and he excelled many of the philosophers and sages of his day. He
was perfect in the wisdom of the Greeks, and in Christian learning, and in the practice and
teaching of divine excellences. And when Theodosius the Great was reigning over the
country of Romya, he sought for a good and wise man to teach his sons Honorius and
Arcadius. And they took this saint to the Emperor Theodosius, and he had him brought
into his presence, and he asked him to teach his sons. And then the emperor brought his
two sons Honorius and Arcadius into his royal abode, and Saint Arsenius taught them, and
corrected (or, admonished) them, as was fitting, and since he devoted much exertion and
toil to teaching them, he inflicted on them severe and painful beatings. When the Emperor
Theodosius their father was dead, his son Honorius reigned over the city of Rome, and
Arcadius reigned over the city of Constantinople. And God put fear of them into the heart
of this saint, because he used to beat them when he was teaching them, and for this reason
God stirred him up to go forth from the world, and to become a lighted lamp to lighten all
those who wished for the salvation of their souls. And whilst he was thinking in his heart
what he should do, behold a voice came unto him form God, saying, “Arsenius, Arsenius,
Arsenius, go forth from this world and thou shalt be saved.” When he heard this voice, he
did not tarry, but he rose up forthwith, and changed his apparel and came to the city of
Alexandria. Thence he departed into the desert of Scete, to the monastery of Saint Abba
Macarius, and he fought a great fight with fasting and prayer, and long and frequent vigils,
and in addition to these ascetic virtues he learned to keep silence. One day, when a man
509

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
questioned him about his keeping silence, he answered, and said unto him, “Many times
when I have spoken I have been sorry and repented, but on no day did I ever repent
because I had kept silence.” And this saint was humble and meek, both inwardly and
outwardly, and he was always doing the work of God; and he never ceased to work with
his hands, and he wept and gave away in alms whatever was left to him. And he composed
many admonitory Discourses, which were profitable to him that wished for the salvation of
his soul. And when he went into the church he hid himself behind a pillar, so that men
might not see him, and this saint worked many signs and wonders. And God revealed to
him signs and wonders, and on many occasions the contending of many men. The
appearance of this saint was good, and his limbs were strong, and his face was bright and
very cheerful, and his beard was long and reached to the hem of his garment; but by reason
of his weeping and his asceticism his eyelashes were wanting. This saint was tall in
stature, but he became bowed by reason of his age; all the days of his life were one
hundred and five years. Of these he passed forty years in the city of Rome and forty years
in the desert of Scete of Saint Abba Macarius, and in the monastery of Mesr (Cairo) twenty
years, and in the monasteries of the city of Alexandria three years, and he returned to the
monastery of Mesr (Cairo), and lived there two years. After this he died in peace.
Salutation to Arsenius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 14
(May 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Pachomius, the father who was the companion of the
beings of the Spirit. This holy man became a monk in his youth with Saint Abba Balamon,
and he lived in submission to him for many years, and he performed with great success all
the labors of the ascetic life. After this the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and
commanded him to gather together to him and to form a company of monks who would
live with him in common, like the Apostles. And very many men gathered together to him,
and he built for them many monasteries, and he ordered for each one of them the same
course of manual labor, and the same kind of food. And he drew up for them a set of rules
(Canon) which they were to observe at their time of prayer, and at their times of eating,
and he was the abbot of them all. And he appointed an abbot, who was to be under his
authority, over each of the monasteries, and he used to go round and visit all the
monasteries from the boundary of Eswan (Aswan), and Etfu (Edfu), and Akmim, and
Dunas, all over Upper Egypt, and in the north [he visited] all the communities of northern
monks who were affiliated to his monasteries. And this father would never permit any of
his sons to be made priests for the sake of vainglory of this world, so that there might not
be any enmity among them, but each monastery had a priest from outside the community
to consecrate the Offering, and to administer the Sacrament. When the Apostolic Father
Abba Athanasius went up into Upper Egypt, he wanted to appoint this holy father priest,
but he fled from the suggestion. And Saint Abba Athanasius said unto his sons, “Say ye to
your father, O thou who hast built thy house upon a rock which will not totter, and hast
fled from vain praise, blessed art thou and blessed are thy sons.” And this saint once
510

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
wished to see Hell, and the angel of the Lord caught him up, and carried him away and
showed him each of the abodes of the saints, and he showed him likewise the places of
punishment in Hell. And this father continued to be abbot of the community for forty
years, and he made them strong, and laid down rules for them, and a Canon, and he made
his disciple Theodore abbot over them; and after this he died in peace. Salutation to Abba
Pachomius and to each of his sons.
And on this day also became a martyr Symmachus, of the city of Farma, in the days of
Bulamis, governor of Mesr (Cairo). This holy man was a weaver of linen apparel, and
costly, fine linen napkins, and he had [two] friends, Theodore and Kikos. And when he
heard that Bulamis, the governor, had arrived, and that he was punishing the Christians,
this holy man began to teach his companions, and to admonish them to abandon the glory
of this fleeting world. Then he embraced them and went out to the town of Bakruz, which
was near the town of Demera, and he came to the governor and found him torturing a
woman, whom they cast into a fiery furnace and she became a martyr; and after this the
fiery furnace became like cool dew. And this holy man was looking on at this, and
afterward, he drew nigh unto the governor, and confessed our Lord and Redeemer Jesus
Christ, and the governor tortured him severely. Now at that time he was sixteen years of
age. Next, the governor hung him up, and he threw him on the wheel, and he crushed his
feet, and blood dripped from his body in great quantity; and some of the blood splashed on
the eyes of a certain blind maiden, and she was able to see forthwith. Then the governor
hung him upon a tree, and the saint prayed many prayers to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
made supplication to Him. And the governor commanded them to cut off the head of the
saint, and the headsman drew his sword, and wanted to cut off his head with his sword, but
his strength failed him, and he was unable to cut off the saint’s head. And the same thing
happened when a second headsman tried, and a third headsman also, even to the tenth
headsman, for the strength of all the ten failed them, and they fell down on the ground.
And after this they tied a rope round the neck of Saint Abba Symmachus, the martyr, and
they dragged him up to the top of a high mountain, and he delivered up his soul into the
hand of God, and he received the incorruptible crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. And there was among the four soldiers one who was deaf and dumb, and as soon
as he saw the body of the saint, he heard with his ears and his tongue spoke. And believing
men came from the city of Edku, and they took away the body of Saint Abba Symmachus,
and many signs and wonders took place through it, and great healings. And the governor
Bilamis was afraid and fled. And men gathered together from the double town Demertayn,
and consoled the kinsfolk of Saint Abba Symmachus the martyr. And when the pagans of
the city saw the signs and wonders which were revealed through him, they believed and
were baptized with Christian baptism, and became martyrs; and they were in number
sixteen hundred and fifty men and woman and children. And the kinsfolk of the saint
came and carried away his body to the city Barmun with great honor, and the governor of
the city of Barmun swathed it for burial in costly cloths at his own expense; and they built
a beautiful church for the saint and laid the body of Abba Symmachus in it. Salutation to
Symmachus, and salutation to the great company of man and women who were martyred
with him.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

511

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Ginbot 15
(May 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became a martyr Saint Simon the zealot, the apostle. He it was who was called
“Nathaniel.” This saint was from Cana of Galilee, and he was learned in the Law of the
Torah, and in the Books of the Prophets, and he had in him zeal and was therefore called
Zealot, and he was just and pure in the Faith, and he accepted the person of no man. And it
was because of this that when Philip said unto him, “Behold, we have found our Lord
Christ, concerning Whom Moses the prophet wrote, Jesus, the son of Joseph, from
Nazareth,” he would not agree with him, but said unto him, “Can any good thing come out
of Nazareth?” And Philip said unto him, “Come and see,” and when he came, our Lord
said unto him, “This is an Israelite in whose heart there is no deceit.” But Simon did not
incline to praise, and he demanded from Him a reason for His praise, and he said unto our
Lord, “Where didst Thou know me?” And our Lord answered and said unto him, “Before
Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree I saw thee.” And Simon knew that in
truth our Lord knew the things, which were hidden, and he said unto Him, “My Lord and
my God.” And Simon did not set himself in opposition to Christ, like the chiefs of the
Jews, who although they saw and heard what was great and stupendous, did not obey and
submit to the righteous man. Now it is said concerning this saint, that when he was a
young man he had a quarrel with another young man, a Gentile, in the desert, and that
Simon smote him a blow, and killed him straightway, and that he buried him under a fig
tree which he had in his house, and no one knew about it except our Savior. And it is also
said concerning him that at the time of the slaughter of the babes [by Herod], his mother
hid him in the market (or, bazaar), and hung him up in a tree which was in her house, and
that she used to take him down and give him suck, and then hang him up again; and she
continued to do this until the persecution of Herod died down. And she told him nothing
whatsoever about this until he was fully grown up, and he never told any man what had
happened unto him; and when [our Redeemer] revealed unto him the salvation which came
to him by a miracle, Simon knew that He was the Son of God in truth, and that He knew
hidden things and was informed about everything. And straightway he bowed before our
Redeemer, and was obedient unto Him, and followed him from that day, and became one
of the Twelve Apostles. And having received the gift of the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, he
talked the languages of all countries, and he knew divine mysteries. And he came to the
town of Kuerja, and to the country of El-Bejah, where he entered into the darkness of the
infidels, and lighted a portion thereof. And he converted many of the wise men and fools,
and lighted them with the light of Christian baptism, and he made those who had been
aforetime like ravening wolves to become like sheep. And he went to the city of the
infidels, and to many [other] cities, and he went into the Island of Barantya, and preached
therein. And the infidels seized him in every place, and they entreated him evilly, and
tortured him severely with divers kinds of tortures. And God added to his power and
strength when being tortured, and God performed great signs and wonders, and [as
examples] of them he raised the dead, and [healed] those whose bones were decayed and
dried up; and they asked him to baptize them with Christian baptism, and he baptized
them. And he lived for many years after this, and he healed a leper at the time when he
baptized him with Christian baptism. And after this the infidels seized him, and hung him
512

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
up on a tree, and he received the perfect and glorious crown of martyrdom in the kingdom
of the heavens. Salutation to Nathaniel.

And on this day also four hundred (sic) people became martyrs in the city of Denderah, in
Upper Egypt. Towards the end of his reign Diocletian tortured them with divers severe
tortures, and then they became martyrs through having their heads cut off.
And on this day also are commemorated Minas, the deacon, and anchorite, and Abba Hor,
and Baklawaya. (Kalanteya) the martyrs, and Katinos, and his wife, of the company of
Isidore. Salutation to the four hundred soldiers who became martyrs in the city of
Bandara.
Salutation to Newaya Krestos.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 16
(May 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Jesus Sirak, the son of Sirak, the son of Elezar of Jerusalem, who poured
forth wisdom from his heart. He saith in the beginning of his prophecy, “The sands of the
sea, and the drops of the rain, and the days of the world, who can number them? The
height of heaven, the breadth of the earth, and the depth of the abyss, and of wisdom, who
can estimate them?” He speaketh concerning the unity of our Lord Christ with His Father.
“The understanding of Wisdom is before the creation of the world. The root of wisdom
unto whom hath it been revealed? And who hath known her counsel? Wisdom is one, and
the awe of her is exceedingly great, and she sitteth upon the throne of God.” And again
Wisdom saith, “I went forth from the mouth of the Most High, and like a mist I covered
the earth. I have my abode in the heavens, and my seat is above the pillar of cloud. I go
round about by myself to the ends of the heavens, and I walk through the depth of the
abyss, and even above the waters of the sea seeking for rest.” And again he saith
concerning the coming down of our Lord Christ, “The Lord said unto me, to Jacob,
‘dwell,’ and to Israel, ‘inherit.’” He saith concerning the death of our Lord Christ, and
concerning the destruction of the Jews who rejoiced in the destruction of the righteous
man, “They shall be snared with nets, and they shall be melted without death coming to
them.” And he saith concerning repentance, and the return to sin, “What profiteth the man
who touched [foulness] after he hath washed?” And he saith concerning the building of
the Church and the new nation, “Have mercy, O Lord, upon the people who are called by
Thy Name, and make Thyself to be like unto a blessing to Israel, and have mercy upon the
city of Thy holiness, and upon Jerusalem, the city which is known to Thee, and fill Zion
with the blessing of Thy voice.” He saith concerning those who appoint the six steps [the
text of this passage is corrupt], “Pray to Christ, to the Most High, that He may make
straight thy path in righteousness.” He saith concerning the righteous, “Hearken ye
children of the righteous, and put forth leaves, and as the flower blossometh under the dew
513

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
of the desert, so do ye blossom, and like the odor of frankincense, even so let your odor be
sweet.” He speaketh reminding us of the work of God, the holy and mighty One in
heaven, and of the appearance of the heavens and the glory thereof, saying, “He maketh the
sun to rise and maketh visible the light, and in the noon-day he drieth up the sea. Who can
stand against His flame, which is like unto that of a blazing furnace that belcheth flame,
and the height of the sun’s power burneth up the mountains. A flame of fire breatheth
forth from Him. And the moon is a sign to the country. By it days are divided, it is a mark
whereby festivals are known (or, determined).” And concerning the stars he saith, “They
are the ornaments of heaven, and the glory of the stars illumineth the earth. They are in the
midst of God’s heaven, and they travel on their appointed ways by the voice of His
Holiness, they go not astray and they never depart from their proper stations.” And
concerning the rainbow he saith, “I have seen His bow, and have blessed its Creator; its
splendor is beautiful, and His hand hath given it its circular form.” And concerning the
snow and the lightning he saith, “By His command the snow falleth, the lightning
hasteneth at His voice, and it flieth through the clouds like the birds. By His command the
east wind bloweth, and the voice of His thunder terrifieth the earth, and the storm of the
west wind bendeth souls, and the snow which covereth up the heavens, as with a garment
of iron, is broken up into particles, which are like unto sharp splinters of crystal.” And
concerning the rain he saith, “When the rain descendeth the dust rejoiceth, and by the voice
of His counsel He drieth up the abyss.” And he praiseth the Fathers, [mentioning] their
various gifts: Enoch how he pleased God, Noah how he found righteousness, Abraham the
believer, and Isaac, how he was given unto him as a blessing which should benefit all the
children of men, and Jacob, how his blessing appeared, and how he begot twelve nations,
and how they were loved by God and man; and Moses, of blessed memory, the glory of the
saints; the similitude of Aaron his brother, how he established the everlasting Laws and
how he made everyone to boast himself in the apparel of holiness and the . . . of gold; and
Phinehas, the son of Eleazar in his three-fold honor; and Joshua, the son of Nun, who
made the people of Israel to inherit their land, and to be glorious when he lifted up his
hand; and Samuel, how greatly beloved he was of God; and Nathan, how he prophesied in
the days of David; and he praises David, how he slew the giant in his youth; and his son
Solomon, how he reigned in the days of peace and lived in a wide space; and he praises
Elijah, how he raised the dead, and brought down fire from heaven, and how he went up to
heaven in a flame of fire, with horses of fire; and Elisha, how the enemy did not terrify him
in his days, and how he raised up two dead people, one during his life and one after his
death; and Hezekiah, how he fortified his city, and how he slew the armies of Persia, and
how he made those who mourned for Zion to rejoice, and removed all uncleanness and sin;
and Jeremiah, how he was holy from his mother’s womb; and Ezekiel, how he saw the
glory of God; and Zerubabel, how he was a sign on the arm; and Twelve Prophets, how he
made their bones to germinate in their places; and Yose’a and Nehemiah, how they
honored and raised up the fallen walls; and Joseph, how there was no man born who was
like unto him; and Shem and Seth, how they were honored by the children of men; and
Adam, how he reigned over all creation; and Simon, the son of the priest, how he built the
Temple in his day, and how he was praised on the return of the people. And he said in
sealing (i.e. finishing) his book, “Bless ye the God of All, Who doeth great things
everywhere, and Who maketh long our days from the womb.” And thus saying, he died.
Salutation to Sirak, the son of Eleazar of Jerusalem.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint John the evangelist, and his preaching in the
country of Asia and to the Ephesians, and in all the cities, which are round about it, and his
514

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
escape from the affliction of drowning in the sea, and from the evil men who worshipped
idols. And he turned all the people from their infidelity, and brought them to the
knowledge of God, and he delivered them from the error of Satan by his teaching and by
the signs, which God wrought, by his hands. When he was old he wrote to them the
Gospel of his preaching, and the Holy Spirit moved him until he wrote down what the
three [other] evangelists had left out, for reasons, which they knew. And he spoke
concerning the Being of the Son, and His Incarnation, and His miracles, which, as he saith
in the Gospel, were innumerable. And then he went up into heaven and saw the hosts of
heaven, and the ordering thereof, and he heard their praising [of God]. And this saint
wrote a book, which he called Abukalamsis. Now the Egyptians have ordained this
festival in commemoration of his preaching, and as with his preaching, so there took place
on this day the consecration of the church in the city of Alexandria. Salutation to the
translation of thy body to the city of Alexandria. Thou didst enter thy grave, O John, but
didst hide thyself and disappear through the might of marvelous power, and only thine
apparel was left [in it] as a memorial. Salutation to John, who became a pilgrim for
righteousness’ sake, and did live with the poor in the outer courts of the houses.
On this day also are commemorated the bishops who were martyred, and Yemen who was
the son of Joseph. [Omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
Salutation to Newaya Krestos.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 17
(May 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great Saint Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus. This holy man came from
a village which was near Beth Gabriel, and his parents were Jews, and they walked in the
Law of Moses; now they were poor, for the father of this saint was a slave, but they were
righteous. And the father of this saint died and left him and one daughter, and their mother
brought them up in the Law of Moses. And his father left him a donkey, which was a very
poor animal, and his mother advised Saint Epiphanius to sell this donkey, and with the
price thereof to obtain some rest and relief in his wretched life. And as the saint was
journeying along with the donkey, he met a certain man who was a Christian, and a just
man, and whose name was Philotheus; and he stopped and talked with Epiphanius and
wanted to buy that donkey from him. And at that moment the donkey kicked Epiphanius
in his stomach, and he fell down on the ground, and was very near death, but Saint
Philotheus made the sign of the Cross over the stomach of Saint Epiphanius, saying, “In
the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost,” and Saint Epiphanius was cured
of his pain forthwith, and he rose up as if he hand never suffered any pain whatsoever.
And then Saint Philotheus cried out over that donkey, saying, “In the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ Who was crucified thou shalt die”; and the donkey fell down and died
forthwith. And when Saint Epiphanius saw these two miracles, he said unto Saint
Philotheus, “Who was this Jesus Who was crucified, and in Whose Name thou didst
515

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
perform this miracle?” And Philotheus answered and said unto him, “This Jesus was the
Son of God, Whom the Jews crucified in Jerusalem”; and this word remained in the heart
of Saint Epiphanius. And in those days there was a certain rich Jew who took Saint
Epiphanius into his house, and brought him up and taught him the Law of Moses. And
when death drew nigh to that Jew, he had no heirs, and he made Saint Epiphanius heir of
all his possessions, and he learned all the Jewish doctrine and the Law of Moses. And one
day he met a certain righteous and learned monk, whose name was Lucianus, and he was a
teacher, and the grace of God was upon him, and he walked with him on the road. And as
they were journeying together on the road, a certain poor man met them and he asked the
monk to give him alms, and as the monk had no money with him to give him, he took off
the hair cloak, which he was wearing and gave it to him. And when the poor man took it
Saint Epiphanius saw that white apparel came down from heaven upon the monk; and he
marveled at this and he bowed down at the feet of the monk, and he asked him, saying,
“Who art thou? What is thy Faith?” And the monk made known to him that he was a
Christian; and Saint Epiphanius asked him to make him a Christian. And the monk took
Epiphanius and brought him to the bishop, who baptized him with Christian baptism, and
taught him the Law of the Christian Faith. And Saint Epiphanius said unto him, “I wish to
become a monk,” and the bishop said unto him, “Thou hast many goods and possessions; it
is not necessary for thee to become a monk.” And Saint Epiphanius went and brought his
sister, and the bishop baptized her with Christian baptism. And he gave of his possessions
to the poor and the needy, and to the widows and the orphans, and to the churches, and he
purchased very many books. Then he became a monk, and his sister became a nun, in the
monastery of that monk whose name was Julius, and who was the cause of his being
baptized; now at that time he was in his days sixteen years old. And he found in that
monastery Saint Hilarion the Great, who although young in days was an elder in the
spiritual fight, and he received Saint Epiphanius, and taught him the path of the ascetic life,
and the doctrine of Christian Law. And the grace of God dwelt upon him, and Hilarion
made him strong in all the Law of the Church, and in the path of the ascetic life in a few
days, and then Saint Epiphanius became perfect in the spiritual fight. And he performed
great miracles, and raised the dead, and cast out demons from men, and he made fountains
of water to appear in dry places where there was no water, and on many occasions he made
rain to fall; and the report of him and of his virtues, and of his knowledge, was noised
abroad. And many men from among the Jews came to him, to dispute with him, and he
showed them their error, and they believed through him, and he baptized them with
Christian baptism; and he likewise converted very many of the philosophers and the
Greeks, and brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Saint Hilarion, his
teacher, prophesied concerning him and said that he would be made bishop of the city of
Cyprus, and he commanded him to go to the city of Cyprus, and to dwell there in a certain
place wherein he ordered him to abide. And he said unto him, “They will seek thee to
make thee bishop, for it is the Will of God.” And Saint Epiphanius departed to Cyprus,
and he dwelt in the place wherein his teacher Hilarion had ordered him to dwell. Now at
the time when the Bishop of Cyprus died, Saint Epiphanius came into the city to buy food,
and he had two monks with him. And there was in that city an aged bishop, a righteous
man, and our Lord Jesus Christ spoke unto him, saying, “Go to the market and thou shalt
meet a monk with two bunches of grapes in his hand which he is going to buy, and his
name is ‘Epiphanius’; make him Bishop of Cyprus, for he is suitable for this office.” And
the aged bishop rose and went to the market, and he found Saint Epiphanius, and there
were two bunches of grapes in his hand, and there were two monks with him, and he asked
516

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him his name, and he answered and said unto him, “My name is Epiphanius.” And the
aged bishop said unto him, “Cast these grapes from thy hands.” And Saint Epiphanius
knew that the prophecy of Abba Hilarion his teacher was fulfilled, and he cast the grapes
down, and he went with him to the church. And the bishop made him a deacon, and three
days later he made him a priest, and on the seventh day he made him a bishop. After this
that aged bishop wished to gladden the heart of Bishop Epiphanius, and he told the people
and made to understand concerning the vision, which he had seen concerning him, and
they rejoiced in him with great joy. And this Saint Epiphanius followed a right course of
action in his diocese, which was well pleasing to God, and he wrote many Discourses (or,
Homilies) and many books wherein will be found profitable doctrine. When he heard of a
man in whom there was no mercy, he used to rebuke him and teach him frequently until he
changed his nature and became merciful. And when this Saint Epiphanius heard that Abba
John, Bishop of the city of Jerusalem, was a man without pity, he made an excuse, and
borrowed from him the gold and silver vessels which he used at his table and out of which
he ate, and Abba John gave them to him, and Saint Epiphanius sold them, and gave [the
price of] them to the poor and needy. And when Abba John asked him for them and he
would not give back any of them, he seized Saint Epiphanius by the hem of his garment, in
the Church of the Sepulcher of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Saint Epiphanius prayed to
God, and He made blind the eyes of Abba John forthwith. And his eyes being blind, Abba
John begged and prayed him with tears to teach him, and to open his eyes, and Saint
Epiphanius prayed and entreated God on his behalf, and God opened one of them. And
then Epiphanius told Abba John how he had sold the vessels of his table, and how he had
given [the price of] them to the poor. And the Empress Eudoxia having sent a message to
Saint Epiphanius to come to her, and to help her to break and to drive out Saint John, the
Mouth of God (i.e. Chrysostom), he went to the city of Constantinople wishing to make
peace between them; but the empress would not listen to him, and she would not submit to
Saint Epiphanius in respect of Saint John, the Mouth of Gold. And the empress answered
and said unto Saint Epiphanius, “If I cannot cast down John, the Mouth of Gold, from his
office, I will open the houses of idols and shut the churches”; and Saint Epiphanius went
forth from her presence sad and sorrowful, and wondering what he should do. And the
servants of the empress made it known in the city of Constantinople, saying, “Behold,
Epiphanius hath deposed John, the Mouth of Gold.” When Saint John heard this report he
sent a letter unto Saint Epiphanius, saying, “Why hast thou done this unjust thing against
me; know thou that thou shalt never reach the throne of thy diocese?” And Saint
Epiphanius sent a reply to his letter, saying, “I have written nothing concerning thee, and I
am not in agreement with the empress against thee, and as for thyself thou shalt [not]
return from exile.” After this Saint Epiphanius wanted to return to the throne of his
diocese, and he went forth from the city of Constantinople to depart to the city of Cyprus,
and God willed to make him to die on the ship before he reached the throne of his diocese,
even as God had revealed to John, the Mouth of Gold; and John, the Mouth of Gold, also
died on his journey, even as He had made Epiphanius to see. And the saint knew the time
of his death, and he rose up and prayed, and he gave his disciples commands and informed
them that they should become bishops, and after that he embraced them, and he lay down
and died in peace. Salutation to Epiphanius. Salutation to Abba Lucianus, Bishop of
Degno.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

517

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Ginbot 18
(May 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the Holy Spirit descended upon the Apostles, ten days after the Ascension of
our Lord Jesus Christ into heaven, even as He promised them, saying, “I will send unto
you another Paraclete, Who shall come from the Father. Wait ye and remain in Jerusalem
until ye received the promise of the Father.” And again He said unto them, “When the
Spirit of righteousness cometh, He will guide you in all righteousness.” And Saint Peter,
who was chief with our Lord Christ, said unto them, “The Lord hath promised to send unto
us the Paraclete, Who is the Holy Spirit, and He will make us to understand what it is meet
for us to hear and to do.” And behold, they heard the sound of a storm wind, and they
smelled a sweet smell, the like of which they knew not in all the world, and there appeared
among them, as it were, tongues of fire, which came down upon each one of them, and
each began to speak with a new tongue; and they fasted for forty days and gave thanks
unto Him. And it is also said in the Acts of the Apostles, that when the days of Pentecost
were ended, and whilst they were all together in one place, suddenly there came from
heaven the sound of the Holy Spirit, and it filled the chamber wherein they were gathered
together; and there appeared as it were tongues of fire, and [one tongue] rested on each of
them. And they were filled with the spirit of power, and they all began to speak the
tongues of all countries, each a different tongue, according as the Holy Spirit gave them
power. And there were good men in Jerusalem from every nation, and when they heard the
report of this, they all gathered together; and they were amazed, for they heard the
Apostles talking the languages of their native countries. And they were astonished, and
they marveled, and said, “Are not all these men of Galilee whom we hear speaking the
languages of our native countries, Parthia, Media and Elam, and the languages of those
who dwell between the rivers (i.e. in Mesopotamia), and Judea, and Cappadocia, and
Phrygia, and Pamphylia, and Egypt, and the borders of Libya, and those who are from
Cyrene, and those who speak Rumi (Greek?), and Jews, and pilgrims, Cretans, and
Arabians. Behold we hear them speaking in the languages of our own countries
concerning the great things of God”; and they were amazed, and were unable to speak.
And they said among themselves, “What is this?” And some of them laughed, and said,
“These men are filled with new wine.” And Peter stood up among the eleven [Apostles],
and cried out with a loud voice, saying, “O all ye men of Judea and ye who dwell in
Jerusalem, know ye, and hearken unto my voice. These men are not drunk as ye think, and
say, for it is only now three hours since day dawned on the earth.” This is what the
prophet Joel said, “And it shall come to pass after this that I will pour out my spirit upon
all souls, and your sons and you daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see
visions and your old men dream dreams” (Joel ii, 28). And he also saith, “And upon my
slaves and upon my handmaidens I will also pour out my spirit, and they shall prophesy,
and I will give a sign in the heavens above, and wonders on the earth beneath” (Joel ii, 29,
30). And it is said in the [Book of] David, “Make not Thou Thy Holy Spirit to go forth
from upon me. Endow me with joy, and with Thy salvation, and make me strong with the
spirit of strength, so that I may teach sinners Thy way.” And again he saith, “Thou sendest
forth Thy Spirit, and they are created. And Thou renewest the face of the earth. May the
glory of the Lord be for ever.” And again he saith, “Thy Holy Spirit shall guide me in the
land of righteousness. For Thy Name’s sake, O Lord, make me alive in Thy righteousness,
518

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and take my soul out of tribulation.” And again he saith, “The Lord hath made strong the
heavens by His word, and all the powers thereof by the breath of His mouth.” And Isaiah
saith, “The Spirit of God Who hath anointed me is upon me, and He hath sent me to
declare and to proclaim freedom for captives, and to announce the chosen year of God”
(Isaiah 61:2). And our Lord saith unto His disciples, “This I tell you whilst I am with you,
but when the Paraclete, the Spirit of righteousness, the Holy Spirit, the Comforter, Whom
My Father will send unto you in My Name, hath come, He will teach you everything, and
will make you to remember everything which I have spoken unto you. My peace I leave
with you, and the peace of My Father I give you, not as the world giveth it give I it unto
you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Behold ye have heard Me say
unto you that I am going to the Father Who hath sent Me, and that I will return again unto
you.” And He also saith, “When the Paraclete hath come, Whom I will send from the
Father, the Spirit of righteousness, which shall go forth from [My Father], He shall be My
witness. And ye are all My witnesses, that He was with Me from of old. And I tell you
these words so that ye may not err, and be offended; but know ye that they will cast you
out of their synagogues, and the time will come and arrive when all who kill you will
imagine that they are bringing sacrifices unto God.” And He also saith, “The words which
I say unto you I say by My truth; It is better for you that I go to the Father, for if I do not
go to the Father the Paraclete cannot come unto you; and if I go I will send Him to you.
And when He hath come, He will rebuke the world concerning sin, and righteousness, and
punishment. Concerning sin, because they have not believed on Me, and concerning
righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye shall not see Me again, and concerning
punishment, because the work of this world shall be judged. And there are many [other]
words which I would say unto you, but ye are not able to bear them now. And when that
Spirit of righteousness hath come, He will guide you into all righteousness, He will not
speak to you from Himself, but He will declare unto you what He hath heard. And He
Who shall come to you shall speak unto you, and tell you. Me He will glorify and praise,
for He springeth from Me, and He will speak unto you, and will tell you.” And after His
Resurrection in ascending to His Father He fulfilled all the Law of Incarnation. And He
said unto His disciples, “Go unto all nations and, in baptizing them, say, ‘In the Name of
the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.’” Salutation to Thy descent, O Paraclete.
Salutation to Thy descent, O Paraclete, the Spirit of grace and righteousness. Salutation to
Thee, O Paraclete, Who didst make the Apostles to drink of Thy fire in a moment.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Ga’argi, the companion of Abba Abraham.
This holy man was a Christian, and his parents were holy and righteous folk, and when he
grew up he became a shepherd and tended their flocks. And he was always thinking in his
mind that he would adopt the garb of the monk, and when his days were twelve years, the
grace of God moved him, and he forsook his sheep and went and walked about in the
desert of Scete. And he saw a pillar of light at a distance, and he went towards it until he
arrived at a river, and then the pillar of light hid itself. And when he had crossed that river,
Satan appeared unto him in the form of an old man, who said unto him, “Know, O my son,
that I saw thy father rending his garments, and weeping for thee, and sorrowing
exceedingly. It is meet that thou shouldst return to thy father, and comfort his heart, for he
thinketh that a wild beast of the desert hath torn thee in pieces”; and after this he returned
to the desert. Now Saint Abba Ga’agi was frightened for a time. And then [he
remembered], that the Holy Gospel saith, “He who loveth his father or his mother more
than Me is not meet to be My disciple” (Matthew x, 37); and having said these words that
Satan became like smoke, and fled from him; and the saint knew that he was Satan. And
519

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
straightway the pillar of light appeared unto him, and the angel of God walked with him in
the form of a monk, and the saint followed the angel until he brought him to the monastery
of the holy father Arion. And Abba Ga’argi dwelt in that monastery with a certain
righteous monk ten years; he tasted no meat, he drank no wine, and he ate no fruit, and
during the ten years he never lay down to sleep, but slept sitting. And his asceticism and
his spiritual fight having become more strenuous, the angel of God appeared unto him and
said, “God telleth thee to moderate the strictness of thine asceticism, and the intensity of
thy spiritual fight, so that thy body may not become exhausted”; and then he drew up for
him a rule of life which ordered him to sit down, and to fast every day until the evening.
And he ate a little bread, and he slept from the time he went to sleep until midnight, for the
repose of his body, and the rest of the night he kept vigil and prayed until the day dawned.
And having continued to observe this course of life for many days, he wished to live by
himself in the Inner Desert; and he continued to go round about in the desert for two years.
And a vision appeared unto him which directed him to return to his place, and straightway
the Divine Power bought him to the monastery of Saints Maximus and Dimatheus which
was near his monastery. And when he went back to his monastery, Abraham came out
from the world, and having arrived at that monastery he met Abba Ga’argi. And they
made friends together, and came to the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius, and they dwelt
with Saint John, Abbot of the desert of Scete; and he gave them a cell near him, and they
dwelt therein, and that place is well known to this day. And that cell was called “Bagbig,”
and our Lord Jesus Christ dwelt with them, now He rent the roof of their abode, and they
worshipped Him, and He gave them peace and comforted them, and went up from them
into heaven. And that opening through which our Lord came down, and through which
they saw the light, is open unto this day. And these saints wrote many books, and
Homilies, and Exhortations, and Admonitions for monks, and they prepared the way for
him that would be obedient, and live in subjection to his fathers. And Abba Abraham died
on the second day of the month of Ter, and after him Saint Abba Ga’argi died on the
eighteenth day of the month of Genbot. And all the days of his life were two and seventy
years; of these fourteen he passed in the world and eight and fifty he devoted to the ascetic
life. Salutation to Abba Ga’argi, who forsook his father’s flocks and followed a pillar of
light into the desert.
And on this day also is commemorated Sinoda, the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 19
(May 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father and fighter, Abba Isaac, the priest of the monasteries of
Debre Macarius. This holy man sprang from one of the small hamlets about Mesr (Cairo),
and his parents were poor [in the possessions of this world], but rich in good works, and
they inherited the Country of the Living. When the holy elders, the monks, came to Mesr
(Cairo) to sell the things, which they had made with their hands, [and were returning,] this
saint followed them into the desert of Scete, and ministered unto them. And he served
520

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
under the yoke of their authority, and became an ascetic, and fought the good fight. And
he had no possessions whatsoever, not even a second change of apparel, during all the days
of his life as a monk. And if men questioned him, and said unto him, “Why dost thou not
obtain a change of apparel like our fathers?” he would answer and say unto them, “I have
been a man of the people up to now, and when I was in the world I had not two changes of
apparel.” And he would also say, “Our fathers wear apparel made of the hair of the camel;
is not one set of garments more profitable to me?” And he was wont to weep very often,
and if men asked him, and said unto him, “Why dost thou weep?” he would say unto them,
“Because my parents died, and left me an orphan.” And for many years he continued to
mix the ashes from the censers with the bread, which he ate at his table. One day he
became sick of a grievous sickness, and one of the brethren brought him a little food,
which had been prepared and cooked by fire, and he would not eat it. And when that
brother had asked him many questions he said unto him, “This food is good and will cure
thy sickness.” And Isaac answered, and said unto him, “Believe my, O my brother, I wish
to remain sick with this sickness, for three years . . . “ And when he became old in days,
and his excellences, and his righteous deeds, were many, the elders gathered together, and
took counsel that they might make him a priest. And he fled from them, and went into the
field where the crops were, and hid himself therein; and the elders went about seeking for
him but could not find him. And when they had passed through the field, they sat down on
the border of it to rest. Now they had with them a donkey, and that donkey went into the
field, and stood still by the place where this father was, and when the elders came into the
field to catch the donkey they found this father; and they seized him and wanted to bind
him so that he might not flee from them. And he said unto them, “Henceforward I shall
know that this is the Will of God.” And he went with them, and was made priest, and he
added to the commands which were laid on the holy fathers, and he taught the young men
good works, and he used to say to them, “Above everything possess ye submission and
obedience, for these are the greatest of the virtues.” And when the time of his death drew
nigh, the young men asked him to dwell in the desert that he might teach them what to do
after he [had left them], and he answered and said unto them, “As long as ye see me
working do ye work, if ye wish to strengthen the habit of dwelling in the desert. When our
fathers died we sorrowed, but when we do even as they did, ye strengthen [our habit of]
dwelling in the desert after them.” And having said these words he died in peace, and
received the crown of praise from our Lord Jesus Christ. Salutation to Isaac the priest.
And on this day also the holy, and mighty, and great, and honorable fighter, the blessed
Isidore, became a martyr. This saint was a man of the city of Antioch. His father was an
honorable man of the kingdom, and the captain of many soldiers, and his name was
Bandala’on; and the name of his mother was Sofia, and she and her husband belonged to
Christian families. And when she brought forth her son she called his name “Isidore.”
And after many days, when his father Bandala’on saw the greatness of the sin and of the
transgressions which the Emperor Diocletian, the infidel, committed, he withdrew his son
Isidore from him, and they left the estate which was formerly theirs, for they belonged to
the nobles of the kingdom. And they took up their abode in the monasteries, where they
remained in hiding, and they lived with a man who was called Samuel . . . for the sake of
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And after this, certain heretics and evil persons went
and accused them before the emperor of hiding from him, and refusing to worship idols;
and straightway the emperor sent five hundred soldiers and had them brought before him.
And they confessed our Lord Jesus Christ, and they said unto him boldly, “When thou
didst forsake our Lord Jesus Christ, we forsook thee; thou hast committed great
521

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
abominations before God.” Then the emperor was wroth, and he commanded his soldiers
to cut off the head of Bandala’on, and they cut off his head and he received the crown of
martyrdom; and Saint Isidore he bound in prison, in order that he might be rebuked. Now
at that time the days of Isidore were twelve years. And after a few days they brought him
to the emperor having tied a rope, with a heavy iron weight attached to it, round his neck,
and he was strong in the Faith; and the emperor asked him, saying, “Is not thy heart
softened, and doth it not advise [thee] to turn from thy Faith?” And having refused to turn
from the True Faith, the emperor forthwith commanded the soldiers to hoist him on the
rack, and to rack his body until his blood ran like water [and they did so]. Then his mother
Sofia took a handful of his blood and dashed it in the face of the emperor, and said unto
him, “Cursed art thou above all men.” And his sister Euphemia also took up stones, and
cast them at the emperor and his officers. And the emperor was wroth, and commanded
his soldiers to cut the women in halves, through their loins, and they did so, and the
women finished their martyrdom. And the saint was hanging on the rack, and watching
what was happening to his mother and his sister. And then the soldiers poured red-hot
coals upon his body, and after this they cut open his body, and dragged out his bowels, and
threw them out into the desert; but neither the fowl of the air nor the wild beasts would
approach them. And our Redeemer healed him, and raised him up as he was before, and
then the saint went before the emperor. And the emperor commanded them to put him on
the iron bed, and to light a fire under him, [and they did so,] and they also put him on the
iron bed, and crushed him until his bowels came out; and again our Redeemer raised him
up. And then [the emperor] killed him together with eight hundred souls, and again our
Redeemer raised him up. And when the emperor saw him, he commanded the soldiers to
bind him, and to cast him into a cauldron of brass, and to pour pitch and grease over him,
and to light a fire under him, and the soldiers did so. And after a few days he commanded
them to cut off his head, and they cut off his head, and forthwith our Lord raised him up
from the dead; and behold, this was the third time that our Lord raised him up after he had
been killed. And after this they tied a stone to his neck, and cast him into the sea, and at
that very moment Saint Michael the archangel brought him out of the sea, and carried him
to the place where the emperor was. And the emperor commanded them to hang him upon
a tree, in the middle of the city, and they did so, and he died; again our Lord raised him
up. This was the fourth time, which he was raised from the dead. And then, the fifth time,
they cast him to the lions, and God delivered him as He did Daniel the prophet. And then
the emperor commanded the soldiers to cut him in pieces, and to pound them up, and to
cast him into the sea in a basket; and the soldiers did so. And forthwith our Lord came
down from heaven, (now Michael and Gabriel were following Him,) and He stood upon
the seashore, and brought Isidore up out of the sea; and He raised him up and healed him,
and there was no injury on him. And the emperor being ashamed, and unable to effect his
will, took counsel with his friends, and then decided to send him to the country of Salonika
that they might have him tortured there. Then the emperor sent him away, bound hand and
foot, and there was a heavy wooden collar about his neck, but the governor of Salonika
showed mercy on him, because he had known him in days past. When the emperor heard
this he was wroth, and he commanded the soldiers to bring the governor and Saint Isidore
to him, and the governor delivered Isidore to him and the emperor placed him in the prison
house, being hungry and thirsty. Now whilst the saint was in the prison house he worked
great miracles, and healed the sick. And when the nineteenth day of Genbot had come, the
emperor commanded the soldiers to take him outside the city, and to hang him upon a
wooden cross, at the sixth hour of the day. And the air was filled with angels, and our
522

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Redeemer was with them, and promised him many things; and Isidore, the saint of God
forthwith delivered up his soul, and received the crown of life. And the number of the
years from the beginning to the end of his strife is as follows; he was in prison for five
years before they tortured him, and he was in prison for one year in the city of Antioch,
and for twelve years he suffered tortures. Salutation to Isidore, and to Euphemia his sister,
and to Sofia his mother.
And on this day also eighty-five thousand and seven people became martyrs with Isidore.
Salutation to these martyrs of the company of Isidore.
And on this day also died Abba Joseph, the light of the world. This holy man learned all
the philosophy of this world in his father’s house, so that those who saw him marveled at
him, and all the Books of the Church; and when he was grown up his father took him to the
bishop, who made him a deacon. And God, Who willed the salvation of his soul, sent
Michael, the angel of light, to him, and he said unto Joseph, “Dost thou love this fleeting
world? Is not it and everything which is therein dross?” Thereupon Joseph began to fast
and to pray, and he asked God to guide him into the path, which he should follow. Now
there was a certain monk on the borders of Walka, whose name was Abba Zacharias, and
who was of the kinsfolk of Abba Joseph, and he took Joseph secretly, and arrayed him in
the garb of the monk, and carried him away to the country of Tegre, where he learned to
work with his hands, and he wrote and weaved and performed all the work of the monastic
life. Then they came into the desert of Barka, and each dwelt alone and labored in the
ascetic life; and they fed upon the fruits of the desert, and the roots of trees. And they
lived there, and the elephants, and serpents, and lions, had knowledge of them, and they
worked many miracles by the might of their righteousness. Abba Nathaniel carried a redhot pot on his hand, and went round holding it in the presence of his brethren. And Abba
Joseph having smashed the pot in which he used to cook, join the pieces together without
spilling his mess of pottage. And when [the monks] wanted to baptize Gebre Kher, who
was about to die, he said unto them, “I will baptize myself with my own hand, for our Lord
Jesus Christ hath this day made me a bishop.” Then each of the saints showed forth the
beauty of his deeds, and they carried Joseph to the bishop, and he was made a priest.
When Abba Zacharias died, Abba Joseph departed into another desert, and he fasted for
forty days and forty nights, standing up and not speaking; and when he fell down through
exhaustion, Michael the angel came and raised him up. And he also stood upon the edge
of a great precipice with his arms extended like the arms of a cross, for forty days and forty
nights, without taking a rest; and Satan came and cast him down into the abyss; and Saint
Michael received him on his wings, and restored him to the place where he had stood. And
he also went into a stone cave, and remained there for forty days and forty nights without
food and drink; and the demons came and frightened him, each with his own hellish
devices, but the angels made him strong. And he used to make eleven thousand
prostrations at a time, until his brains ran down through his nose. And from that place he
wandered about through all the mountains of Tegray, and he journeyed through the land of
the South, and he came to the tomb of Yared, and he saw gates of light before the door of
his cell, which was open, As he was returning thieves found him, and they stoned him with
stones, and beat him with sticks, and they speared him with spears, and left him lying
prostrate. And our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, came and healed him. One day he found
the body of a dead woman, and when he had made over it the sign of the Cross, she rose up
like a woman waking out of a sleep. And he went on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem thrice, and
received the blessing of the holy places. And he visited the tombs of Peter and Paul and
523

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the tombs of all the Apostles, and he traveled as far as Bartos and India. When he came to
a river, which was full of water, he used to make the sign of the Cross over it, and then
walk over the water on his feet; and the lions and the leopards followed him tamely. When
he lacked food he would say a blessing over some stones, and they were turned into bread.
And he went to Debre Libanos, to the monastery of our father Takla Haymanot, and
received the garb of the monk from Abba Tewolde Medhin. And Abba Tewolde wished to
try him, and he gave him six crushed and broken twigs to plant; and having planted them
they grew up into trees, which exist to this day. And many men and monks came to him,
and lived under his authority, and they dwelt in one habitation near a church, which had
been built in the name of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, and in the Name
of God the Father. And one day in a vision our holy Lady the Virgin Mary gave him
incense, and he offered up incense with the Four and Twenty Priests of heaven before the
throne of the God of Hosts; and the Apostles used to come to him, and bless him. One day
a leopard snatched away a child from his mother, and when she had adjured the animal in
the name of Joseph, the leopard brought the child back three days later. And he made it the
rule for all his sons that they should possess neither money nor cattle, that they should not
eat flesh or drink wine, old or new, that they should learn humility and meekness, that they
should not utter words of emptiness, and that they should not laugh or joke in church; these
and similar rules he laid down for them in their Canon. And having finished his life of
labor and fighting, he died in peace, and was buried in the Church of Heaven) which is
called Debre Tabor; and through his body countless signs and wonders took place.
Salutation to Joseph.
And on this day also is commemorated our great Abuna Egzi’e.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 20
(May 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy and just man Caleb, King of Ethiopia. This saint loved and
feared God, and he was of the True Faith. And when he heard that the Jews had killed the
Christians in the city of Nagran, he was filled with divine zeal, and sorrowed greatly. Then
he rose up and went to the church wherein the kings of Ethiopia and the bishops are buried,
and having come therein he stood up on the royal throne before the church, and he stripped
off his beautiful and royal apparel, and dressed himself in rags. And he laid hold upon the
horns of the altar, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and prayed in the following words: “O
Lord, my God, the Lord of all created things, both those which are visible and those which
are invisible, Whom thousands of thousands of angels praise, Whom myriads of myriads of
archangels serve, Whom the Cherubim with their many eyes, and the Seraphim each with
his six wings, serve and proclaim holy, ceaselessly, saying, ‘Holy, Holy, Holy, God of
Hosts,’ Whom the saints sanctify, the God of gods, the Lord of lords, and the King of
kings, the Father of our Lord and God and Redeemer Jesus Christ, Who art decked with
light as with a garment. Thou art He Who was pleased to send forth Thy Son, that is to
say, the Word, from Thyself, that He might bring back the men who were cast away, the
524

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Rational Lamb Who was not cast away, Who came down from heaven of His good
pleasure (or, free Will), and was not separated from the Father and the Holy Spirit, and was
made man by Mary, the holy Virgin, Who hast wrought for the salvation of the sons of
men, and hast brought us out of the darkness, and hast led us into the light of the
knowledge of Thee. Behold Thou, O God, and see what the impious infidel hath done to
Thy flock, how he hath seized and slain the sons of Thy Church like sheep and goats, and
hath burnt in fire the children of Thy Church; and moreover, he hath plundered the Church,
and destroyed the children of Thy people and Thine inheritance. I believe on Thy Only
Son, and on the Holy and Living Spirit, and I have laid hold upon the horns of Thine altar
and taken refuge in the sign of Thy Cross, and I am strong in the Faith. And behold, I will
go out, and slay Thine enemies by the might of the Cross of Thine Only One and Thy
Messiah, for I am jealous for Thee, and for my brethren, and for the believers my fathers.
O God, let me not be put to shame and disappointed in my hope, so that they who do not
know Thy Name may not say, ‘Where is their God?’ If Thou wilt not hearken to my
prayer, and wilt reject my petition because of the multitude of my sins and transgressions,
slay me in this place. O let not Thine inheritance fall into the hands of Thine enemies, the
deniers of Christ, who know not Thy Name; for we are Thy people and the sheep of Thy
pasture, and Thee we praise for ever and ever. Amen.” Then Caleb the king went out
from his royal city, and he departed and destroyed, and killed all the Jews who had laid
waste the city of Nagran, and he performed countless miracles. And he returned to his
royal city with great honor and joy not to be estimated, giving thanks to God at the same
time. Then he thought in his heart and said, “With what shall I pay back to God for all that
He hath done for me? But I have nothing whatsoever wherewith to reward Him, unless I
offer my soul and body as a gift to my Lord Jesus Christ.” Then he forsook the world, and
abandoned his kingdom, and went out by night, and departed on foot, and came to the
monastery, which was on the top of the mountain of Abba Pantaleon, wherein good monks
lived. And he entered the monastery and lived in a cell, the doors whereof he shut so that
he might see no man, and he swore that he would never go outside the cell, and that he
would never see the world again. And he took nothing in with him except a mat to lie
upon, an earthenware pot, and the apparel of the monk, which he wore; and his food
consisted of nothing but bread and salt, and his drink was water. His royal crown and his
royal apparel, which were of great price, he sent to Jerusalem. And he wrote a letter to
Abba John, Archbishop of Jerusalem, asking him to hang up the crown above the doors of
the Tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ. And after [this] he went into that rock and never spoke
to anyone; and he pleased God and died in peace. Salutation to Caleb.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Ammonius, of Dabra Tona. When this
saint was a young man, he saw a vision in which it seemed that Saint Abba Anthony called
him to the monastic life. When he awoke from his sleep he rose up straightway, and went
to Saint Abba Isidore, who arrayed him in the garb of the monk, and Ammonius dwelt with
him. And after this he returned to Dabra Tona, and he built himself a cell and he fought a
strenuous spiritual fight by day and by night. And Satan the accursed became jealous of
him, and he came to him in the form of a woman, who was a nun. And when Satan
knocked at the door of his cell, he opened unto him, and he did not hide himself from him
because the knocker was Satan, the Enemy. And the saint asked him to pray with him, and
Satan refused and revealed his iniquity, and he changed his form and became like a flame
of fire, and then he said unto him, “I will bring upon thee still more strenuous warfare.”
And Satan, the Enemy, departed. And he entered into the heart of a certain young woman
with a beautiful face, and he moved her to attempt to make the saint to fall into sin. And
525

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
she dressed herself in fine linen and came unto him at the time of evening, and she began
to knock at the door of his cell and to say, “I am a woman on a pilgrimage, and I have
strayed from my road, and arrived [here], and the evening hath overtaken me; leave me not
outside so that the wild beasts may not devour me, and I be punished for my sins.” And
when he opened the door to her, he knew that she was a trap of Satan, the accursed, and
that it was he who had sent her. And he began to admonish her from the Divine Books,
and he caused the fear of Hell to rise up in her, and dread of the punishment, which is
prepared for sinners. And he told her of the joy and gladness, which are prepared for the
righteous; and at that moment God opened her heart to understand what he said unto her.
And she stripped off her fine apparel and cast herself down at his feet, and she wept and
begged him to receive, and to save her soul; and he shaved off the hair of her head, and
dressed her in sackcloth of hair. And she practiced many ascetic excellences, which
excelled in strictness the excellent works of the great saints. Thus she prayed twelve
hundred prayers in a night and a day, and she fasted two days or three days, or seven days,
at a time, and the devil was put to shame by work of this kind. And she became like a
monk in appearance, and used to go into all the monasteries [at will]. And a certain
wretched man told [the brethren] that Abba Ammonius, after great ascetic labors, lusted for
and desired a woman, and that she was living with him in his cell, and that he had put the
monks to shame, and had disgraced the garb of the monk. And when Abba ‘Ebelo, who
was like the angels heard this, he rose up straightway, and taking with him Abba Joseph
and Abba Bohe, they came to Saint Ammonius in Dabra Tona. And when they knocked at
the door of his cell that woman went out to them, and they talked together, and said, “In
truth, is what that monk told us true?” Now Saint Abba Ammonius had called that woman
“Sadji,” that is to say, “the meek.” And having entered into the cell and prayed, Abba
‘Ebelo, and Abba Joseph, and Abba Bohe sat down and talked until the evening
concerning the greatness of God. And Abba Ammonius said unto them, “Rise up, and let
us go and see Sadji making a little bread for us.” And when they had gone in they found
her standing in the red-hot oven, with her hand stretched out towards heaven, and praying;
and when they saw her they marveled exceedingly at this great miracle, and they glorified
God. And after this she brought them bread, and they ate. And that night the angel of God
made known to Abba ‘Ebelo concerning the spiritual fight of Sadji, and to Saint Abba
Ammonius, and that God Himself had brought them that day to witness the death of Sadji.
And when the third hour of the night arrived, she was seized with violent fever, and she
made one prostration to God and at that moment she delivered up her soul; and they
swathed her carefully and buried her. And Abba Ammonius began to describe to them her
excellences, and he said unto them that Sadji had dwelt with him for eighteen years, that
she had never once raised her face, and that she had not seen his face nor he hers; and their
food was bread and salt. And a few days after Saint Abba Ammonius also died. Salutation
to the blessed Ammonius of Tona. Salutation, salutation to Sadji, the disciple of
Ammonius.
And on this day also died Abba Hor, the disciple of Abba ‘Amoni (Ammonius), and Abba
Darama. And on this day also are commemorated those who became martyrs with Heroda,
and Zacharias of Antioch.
Salutation to Hor, and to Abba ‘Amoni (Ammonius), who was an ascetic for forty years,
and an adorer of Mary, who appeared unto him.
Salutation to Abba Darama.
526

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Batra (or, Zatra) Wangel, the Abbot of
Dabra Libanos, the sixteenth of the learned fathers. This holy man was from his early
youth arrayed in innocence, like the angels, and he loved humility and meekness. After he
assumed the garb of the monk, he fought a good fight, and he was appointed shepherd of
the flock of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then he died at a good old age, as on this day the
twentieth of Genbot.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 21
(May 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day all Christian communities celebrate the festival of the appearance in public of
our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, in Debre Mitmak, as she was seated upon
light, in a circle, in the church, which was built in her name. She was enveloped in divine
light, and there were standing round about her all the hosts of the angels, and archangels,
and their wings were extended and overshadowing her, and the Seraphim also were
standing round about her with their censers, and they were censing her great majesty. And
every time they bowed down to her they praised her, saying, “God the Father looked down
from heaven upon earth and He found none like unto thee. He sent His Only Son, and He
was born of thee.” And the martyrs came, mounted upon their horses, and they bowed
before her, and Mar Saint George descended from his horse, and two others came and
bowed before her, and he who came after [Saint George] was Saint Mercorios, mounted
upon a black horse. After him all the martyrs came, and bowed down to her, and did
homage to her, and she blessed them, and they returned. And there came also the company
of the prophets, and the righteous, and they bowed down and did homage to her. And the
children whom Herod slew also came lamenting before her, and they leaped up and
embraced each other. And when those who were gathered together saw this, it filled them
with joy and they thought they were in heaven. And if there was anyone whose father was
dead, or his mother, or a kinsman, or a friend, and he asked her, saying, “O my holy Lady,
thou Virgin Mary, thou God-bearer, show me so and so,” straightway she made that person
to come in the form he had before [on earth]. And also when they threw down their stoles
she took the one which she wished in her hands, and threw it back to them, and they
divided it among the women a thing of blessing. And thus Christian and Armani (Pagan?)
saw her for five days. And when they wished to go home to their own houses, they did
homage to her and made an agreement with her, and she blessed them with her fingers.
Salutation to him that looked upon thee, O Mary, as the eye of a daughter looketh at her
mother.
And on this day also died the Holy Father Abba Martianus. This saint became a monk in
his early manhood with a certain holy elder, and fought a great spiritual fight, and then he
went to a monastery of the city of Caesarea of Palestine, which was called Debre Tabot
Noha, and there he fought an exceedingly great and strenuous fight. And having lived for
seven and sixty years as an ascetic, fighting the spiritual fight with fasting, and prayer, and
prostrations, and vigils by day and by night, the report of his virtues and righteousness
527

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
became noised abroad. And a certain woman, who was a harlot, and sinner, and who was a
notorious evil-doer, heard of him, and she said unto those who talked about his virtues, and
his righteousness, and his holiness, “How much more are ye going to praise the man? He
liveth in the desert and he never seeth a woman. If he once saw me I would stain his
virginity, and defile his holiness, and destroy his abstinence from women.” And those
men, because they knew his holiness, and his virginity, and the purity of his body,
contradicted the harlot about this, and fierce contention broke out between her and them.
And she said unto the, “How much money will ye give me if I go to him, and make him to
fall into sin with me? What will ye give me, I say?” And they agreed with her to give her
a certain sum of money if she did this. And straightway she rose up, and took her
ornaments, and her apparel, and her many perfumes, (now she was very beautiful to look
upon,) and she went to his cell, wearing poor and wretched rags wherein her face was
muffled. And themselves tied up her ornaments and her fine apparel in a bundle; and then
she hid herself in a place, which was near his cell until the evening. And in the evening
she knocked at the door of his cell, and asked him to let her remain with him until the
morning. And the saint was very sorry for himself, and he pondered in his heart deeply.
And he said, “If I leave her outside the wild bests of the desert will eat her, and if I bring
her in I shall have to suffer a warfare about her within myself.” And after this he opened
the door to her, and he left her in that place, and went to another. And the woman arrayed
herself in her beautiful apparel, and she adorned herself and perfumed herself, and she
came to him and asked him to lie with her; and she said unto him, “No one will see me
here.” And the saint knew that she was a snare of Satan, the Enemy, and he said unto her,
“Wait a little for me until I look at the road, for if we do not fear God it is meet for us to
fear men, who are like unto us.” And he went out from her, and lighted a large fire, and as
he put his head into the flames time after time, he said to his soul, “If thou art able to bear
Hell, commit sin.” And he tarried in coming to her, she went to him, and she saw him in
the flames burning his hands and his fingers and his feet. And she was terrified, and
dragged him out of the fire, and her sense returned to her, and she stripped off her raiment,
and cast it away, and threw herself down at his feet and begged him to help her to save her
soul. And he began to teach her, and to admonish her about the end of this fleeting world,
and the desire thereof, and she repented with all her heart. And he said unto her, “It is not
desirable for us to live together in the same place.” And he took her to a house of virgins,
and commanded the abbess to take charge of her, and she pleased God during the rest of
life, which remained to her. And she reached a good old age, and received the gift of the
Holy Spirit, and healed many sick folk. And Saint Martianus, fearing lest the Enemy
might bring to him another woman, departed to an island in the river [Nile], and dwelt
there, and a certain owner of a boat used to bring him food, and buy the work of his hands.
And when the saint had dwelt there many days the boat belonging to that man sank in the
river, and a certain woman hung on to one of the planks thereof, and the waves of the river
washed her to the island on which Saint Martianus lived. And when he saw her he was
frightened, and was sorry, because he would have to dwell with her; but the word of God
spoke to her, and he arrayed her in the garb of the nun. And he prepared food for her, and
he said unto her, “It is not desirable for us to dwell together in one place.” Then he left
that island, and cast himself into the river; and a large monster of the river took him up and
carried him over, and brought him to dry land. From that time onwards he never lived in
[one] place, but wandered about in the mountains, and deserts, and uninhabited districts
until he had traveled through one hundred and sixty countries. He never stayed one day in
one place. And after this he shut himself up in a cave, and when he knew that the time of
528

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
his death was nigh, he called the bishop and told him all that had happened to him, and all
his spiritual fight from the beginning to the end thereof; and the bishop marveled at the
great size of his body. And before all this happened the angel of God had appeared to the
bishop, [and told him] to think about the body of Saint Martinaus. And after this he
delivered up his soul into the hand of God; and the bishop swathed him for burial and
buried him with great honor. And as for the woman who was on that island, the owner of
the boat visited her until she died; and he came and found her body white as snow, and he
carried it to his own country. Salutation to Abba Mardali.
And on this day also died Abba Aaron, the Syrian. This saint was a fighter from his youth,
and at length the gifts of healing and working miracles were given unto him. When
pilgrim monks came to him he used to cook for them young doves, and when they said
unto him, “We do not eat flesh,” he would say words of blessing over the doves, and he
dismissed them and they flew away. And he built a monastery, and the water was a long
way off down the mountain, and he prayed a prayer, and made the sign of drawing it up
with his hand, and so made the water to ascend. One day Satan came to him to destroy
him with evil, and Abba Aaron, knowing the appearance of him by the grace of the Holy
Spirit, which dwelt upon him, said unto him, “Come into this cave to dwell.” And when
Satan had come into that cave, one side of it fell on him and buried him, and a huge stone
leaped upon him, and Satan was put to shame. And also, when the governor of the city
died, did not he raise him up by his prayer? And this father made a lion to carry four
water-jars on his back, and the lion drew water for him for a period of ten years; and then
he departed to God. Salutation to Aaron, who made young doves, which had been boiled,
to fly away.
And on this day also are commemorated Amos, the prophet, and Mardali.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 22
(May 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Andronicus, the holy apostle. Our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ chose
this saint, who was one of the numbers of the Seventy-two disciples, whom He sent out
before His Passion to preach the kingdom of God. And the gift of the Holy Spirit
descended upon him in the Hall of Zion, and he preached with the holy apostles in every
city. After this the holy apostles laid their hands upon him, and they made him Bishop of
the city of Niwebyas, and he preached therein, and converted many of the pagans
[Syrians], and brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, they having dwelt in
the darkness of infidelity. And after this he took Julianus, the apostle, and they went about
through many cities, and they preached and baptized innumerable folk. And they
performed signs and wonders, and cast out many demons from men, and they healed many
who were sick of very severe sicknesses, and they overthrew the houses of idols, and built
churches of our Lord Jesus Christ. And having finished their preaching, God wished to
remove them from the sorrow and toil of this world, and to bring them into the world of
529

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
joy and gladness. And then Andronicus, the apostle, fell sick and died, as it were, on this
day; and straightway Julianus the apostle prepared him for burial and laid him in a grave,
and he himself died on the following day. Salutation to Andronicus.
And on this day also is commemorated Jacob Sharakawi.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 23
(May 31)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Julian, the apostle. This saint was a son of the house of Gabriel,
[who was] of the children of Israel and of the tribe of Judah. Our Lord Jesus Christ chose
him among the number of the Seventy-two disciples, and he received the gift of the Holy
Spirit, Paraclete; and he preached with the apostles, and there came upon him, as upon the
apostles, great tribulation and persecution. After this the apostles laid their hands upon
him and made him a bishop, and sent him to preach the kingdom of God, and he preached
in all the cities everywhere. And after this he went with Andronicus, the apostle, and he
preached with him, as is recorded in the section for the preceding day. When Saint
Andronicus died, this Saint Julian prepared him for burial and buried him; and then he
prayed to God not to separate him from him; and on the following day this holy man died.
And behold the holy Apostle Paul mentioneth these apostles in his Epistles to the men of
Rome, and saith at the end thereof, “Salute Andronicus and Julian” (Romans xvi, 7).
Salutation to Julian of the house of Gabriel.
And on this day also are commemorated Ensia, the martyr, and Aphroditus, the fourth of
the Seventy-two disciples, and Julia the martyr, and Theodore the priest, and Tadros the
bishop, and Julianus and his mother, who were martyred in the city of Alexandria, and the
companions of Isidore, a woman, and her child, who was two months old. And her child
spoke, saying, “I am a Christian like my mother”; now Diocletian killed them. Salutation
to Julius and his mother.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 24
(June 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day our Lord Jesus Christ came to the land of Egypt, and He was a child whose
days were two years, even as the Holy Gospel saith. And the angel of God appeared unto
Joseph in a dream, saying, “Rise up, take the child and His mother, and depart to the land
of Egypt and remain there until I tell thee.” And the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ took
530

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
place for two reasons, in the operation of His wisdom, firstly: If Herod, the infidel, found
Him, and was able to kill Him, others would think that His Incarnation was from below;
and secondly: That the men of the land of Egypt might not be deprived of His grace, and
of His going about in their midst, and that He might smash the idols which were in the land
of Egypt, and that the prophecy of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled which said,
“Behold, God shall mount upon a swift (or, light) cloud, and shall come to the land of
Egypt, and the idols of Egypt shall fall down” (Isaiah xix, I). Our Lord, in the operation of
His wisdom, fled before Herod, but it was not through fear that He fled. And the first city
at which Joseph, and our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, and Salome, whose name was “Balata,” arrived, would not receive them. And they
dug there a well of water, and it became a means of healing, not only to the men of that
city, but also to all other men. Thence they departed to the monastery of Gamnudi, and
they crossed the river towards the west. And the Lord put His foot upon a stone, and the
mark of the sole of His foot is in the stone to this day, and the name of that place is called
“the place of the sole of the foot of the Lord Jesus.” And our Lord said unto His mother,
the holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, “Know thou, O Mary, my mother, that in this place a
church shall be built in thy name and in mine. And I will make manifest therein signs and
wonders, until the end of the world, and it shall be called ‘Debre Mitmak.’” Thence they
departed towards the river, and crossed over towards the west, and He saw the desert of
Scete from afar, and our Lord Jesus Christ blessed it, and He said unto His mother, “Know,
O my mother Mary, that in this desert there shall live many monks, [and] ascetics, and
spiritual fighters, and they shall serve God like the angels.” Thence He came to Debre
Mesrak. And there was a staff in the hand of Joseph, wherewith he used to smite (?) our
Lord Jesus Christ, and Joseph gave Him the staff. And when He took it He said unto His
mother, “We will tarry here”; and that place and its desert, and the well of water, which is
the first there, became known as Matareya (Near Heliopolis). And our Lord took Joseph’s
staff, and broke it into little pieces and planted these pieces in that place, and He dug with
His own divine hands a well, and there flowed from it sweet water, which had an
exceedingly sweet odor. And our Lord took some of the water in His hands, and watered
therewith the pieces of wood which He had planted, and straightway they took root, and
put forth leaves, and an exceedingly sweet perfume was emitted by them, which was
sweeter than any other perfume. And these pieces of wood grew and increased and they
called them “Balsan” (i.e. the balsam trees). And our Lord Jesus Christ said unto His
mother, the holy Virgin Mary, “O my mother, these Balsan, which I have planted, shall
abide here for ever, and from them shall be [taken] the oil for Christian baptism, when they
baptized in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.” Thence they went to
the city of Behensa, and to a place, which is called Bet Iyasus, which is interpreted “House
of Jesus”; and our Lord Jesus Christ dug there a well whereof the water cured every
sickness and every pain. And He also set a sign in a certain well of the river of Egypt,
which rose [in flood] every year. At the time of prayer at which they offered up incense at
mid-day to God by that well, as soon as the reading of the Gospel was ended the water
which was in the well would rise up and come to the mouth of the well; and they used to
receive a blessing from it, and straightway the water would recede until it reached its
former level; and the people used to measure by the cubit the height to which it rose above
its normal level at the bottom of the well. If the height were twenty cubits, there would be
great abundance in the land of Egypt that year; if the height were eighteen or seventeen
cubits, there would also be abundance, but if the height were only sixteen cubits there
would be a great famine throughout the land of Egypt. And then they went to
531

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
‘Eshmunayn, and our Lord broke the idols which were therein; and they dwelt there for a
few days with a man whose name was ‘Apelon. And there were there some komol trees,
and they bowed [their heads] before our Lord Jesus Christ, and they have remained bent
until this day. Thence they went to Debre Kuskuam, and they remained therein for six
months, and our Lord placed a well therein, the water of which healed every sickness. And
when our Lord had finished living in the land of Egypt the days which He wanted to live
there, that is to say, three years and six months, and Herod was dead, the angel of the Lord
appeared unto Joseph in a dream, and again he spoke to him, saying, “Rise up and take the
Child, and His mother, and depart to the land of Israel.” When they returned from that
place, they came to the city of Mahareka; and having come to Mesr (Cairo), they dwelt in
the cave, which is the church of Saint Sergius in Mesr (Cairo). After this they went out
from Mesr (Cairo) and came to Matariyah, and they bathed there, and the well therein
which our Lord Jesus Christ made became holy and blessed from that hour, even as has
already been said. And thence went forth the oil “Balasan,” [the plants of which] our Lord
planted, and with this oil Christian baptism is made perfect, and with it churches and altars,
and sacred property are consecrated. And with it they give relief and healing to all those
who are sick, and they present it as a gift to kings, who boast themselves of its possession.
And from this place they went to Mehdab. And by His return was fulfilled the prophecy of
Hosea the prophet, saying, “Out of Egypt have I called My Son” (Hosea 11:1). And it is
meet to us to celebrate a spiritual festival on this day, and we should sing on it the words of
David the prophet, “God hath wrought signs in the land of Egypt, and wonders in the Field
of Zoan” (Psalm 78:12). And also, “He hath wrought in thee the signs of Egypt, and in the
Egyptians,” and with them. “Glory be to God our Lord Jesus Christ, and to this Good
Father, and to the Holy Life-giving Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.” Salutation to Thy
coming to the land of Egypt.
And on this day also died Habakkuk, the prophet, one of the Twelve Sons of the Minor
Prophets. One day this prophet cooked some lentils in a pot, and as he was carrying the
pot, with some bread, to the men who were reaping in the fields outside the city, the angel
of God appeared unto him, and said unto him, “Take this food to Daniel the prophet in the
den of lions of the city of Babylon.” And Habbakkuk said unto him, “I have not seen
Babylon and I do not know the den therein.” And the angel of God seized him by the hair
of his head, as he was carrying the food, and brought him to the pit of the city of Babylon,
which was shut, and he gave that food to Daniel and he ate; and immediately the angel of
God brought him back to the land of Judah. Now he was a very old man. When the
children of Israel returned from captivity, and built the sanctuary, Habakkuk came to
Jerusalem, and they welcomed him with great joy, and they made the sanctuary beautiful
and assembled to hear his prophecy. And he opened his mouth in the Holy Spirit and said,
“O God, I heard the sound of Thee and I was afraid. I saw Thy work and I marveled.”
And then he spoke in his prophecy concerning the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And concerning His birth in Bethlehem of Judah, he saith, “God shall come from Mount
Faran”; and then he continued his prophecy to the end and he wrote it and he mixed it with
the prophecy of the prophets. And he dwelt in Jerusalem. And a certain woman of the
sons of Israel came unto him weeping, and she said unto him, “I had two sons, and certain
men required of them to worship idols, and they refused to do so, and the men killed them
and cast their bodies out on the highway.” And Habakkuk went forth with her to the place
where the young men who had been killed were lying, and he besought God to give them
back their souls; and God accepted his prayer, and made the two young men to live again.
When the time drew nigh for him to die he called his kinsfolk, and told them that he was
532

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
going to die. And he continued to gaze upwards for the space of an hour, and behold a
great arm, like the hand [and arm] of a man, opened the roof of the house, and came down
from above, and reached itself out to his mouth, and took his soul. And when Anastasius,
the Christian emperor, read the story of the strife of Habakkuk, he built a church in his
honor in the city of Kartas, in the north of Egypt, and it was consecrated as on this day.
Salutation to Habakkuk.
And on this day also the blessed and chosen fighter Abba Abkuelta became a martyr. This
saint belonged to a noble family of the city of ‘Ensena, and he was a pure priest and a wise
physician, and he did great good to all the suffering folk who came unto him, and he
healed them without payment; moreover he also gave them food, and drink, and raiment,
and anything of which they stood in need. In those days Diocletian, the infidel emperor,
sent orders into the region of Upper Egypt, to the governor whose name was Arianus that
he was to compel the men of that country to worship idols. Thereupon they took this saint
and carried him away from ‘Ensena to the city of ‘Eshmunayn, and set him before the
governor. And the governor spoke unto him with words of gentleness, in order to persuade
him to abandon the True Faith, but he count not make him do so. And straightway the
governor ordered his soldiers to torture him with divers kinds of tortures, and they did so,
until his skin melted, and then they burnt him alive in the fire; thus he finished his
martyrdom on the twenty-fourth day of the month of Genbot. And certain believers came,
and swathed him for burial in costly cloths, and they buried him in one of the upper hills
near his city. Salutation to Abba ‘Abkuelta.
And on this day also took place the death of Eleazar, the priest, the son of Aaron. And on
this day also are commemorated ‘Akledis (Clitas), and Teflas, and Da’ala Maryu.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 25
(June 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Salome, the sister of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the Godbearer. She was the daughter of Matata, the son of Levi, the son of Melki, the son of
Aaron the priest; now Matata had three daughters; the name of the oldest was “Mary,” and
the second was called “Sofia,” and the third was “Hanna.” Mary brought forth Salome,
and Sofia brought forth Elisabeth, and Hannah brought forth our holy Lady, the Virgin
Mary. And this Salome was brought up in the house of Joseph with our holy Lady, the
Virgin Mary, and she ministered unto her, and she was not separated from her when our
Redeemer was born. When Joseph was thinking about our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary,
and wondering how she had brought forth her Son, being a virgin, this Saint Salome made
bold to touch the seal of Mary’s virginity, and her fingers were burned by divine fire; but
as soon as she touched the Child she was healed, [and her fingers] became as before. By
this sign Joseph knew that our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, was the God-bearer. When
Herod commanded that the children of Bethlehem should be killed, she made the Child and
Joseph and His mother, the Lady Mary, to take to flight, and she became a participator in
533

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the trouble caused by Him, sometimes carrying Him in her arms, and sometimes washing
Him; and she ministered unto Him all His days--three and thirty years. On the day of His
Passion she was not separated from Him, and she lamented and wept, and on the day of
His Resurrection she saw Him before the Apostles saw Him. And even in the upper
chamber of Zion the Holy Spirit came down upon her and the holy women, and she made
many to believe on Him in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; and she received from the
Jews much derision and much enmity. Salutation to Salome.
And on this day also Saint Cotylus, a physician from the city of Antinoe, became a martyr.
This saint had a God-fearing father, and his mother also feared God; and his father was
governor of the city of Antinoe. He had no son, and he besought God frequently to give
him one, and at length He gave him this saint; and he admonished him and taught him the
Books of the Church. This saint was pure from his youth up, and he was an ascetic, and
fought the spiritual fight; he prayed many prayers, and his rule was to pray one hundred
prayers by night, and one hundred prayers by day. When he was grown up his parents
wanted to see him married, but this he did not wish. They had a daughter, whom they had
begotten after this holy man Cotylus, and they married her to Arianus, the governor of the
city of Antinoe, who succeeded the father of this saint. Now when the father of Cotylus
had waxed old in days, he asked the emperor and the emperor removed him from his
office, and gave it to Arianus his son-in-law. And when his father died, Cotylus built a
house wherein pilgrims were received, and then he learned the books of medicine, and
became a physician; and all the sick folk came to him, and he healed them without
payment. When Diocletian denied Christ, Arianus joined him in his denial, in order to
keep his office, and he used to torture the martyrs. And this Saint Cotylus yearned to
become a martyr, and he went to the governor’s Council, and cursed Arianus, and the
emperor, and their gods, which were idols; but Arianus was not able to do him any harm
because of his sister [who was his wife], but he sent him to the city of Behensa, where the
saint remained in the prison house for three years. And Cotylus sent to his sister, and she
delivered him from the prison house. After Arianus, another governor was appointed, and
[Arianus] told him the story of this Saint Cotylus. And the governor sent and had him
brought, and he was angry with him, and said unto him, “If thou wilt not cast incense to the
gods I will torture thee with very great severity.” And the saint said unto him, “I will not
cast incense to unclean idols, but only to my Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living
God.” And straightway the governor was wroth, and he commanded the soldiers to torture
him with every kind of torture; but each time the angel of God came to him, comforted
him, and strengthened him to endure, and He healed him and worked many signs and
wonders by him. And when the governor was tired of torturing him, and Cotylus would
not change his opinion, he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head, and they cut it off,
and the saint received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Then the
men of his house swathed him for burial, and they laid him in a beautiful shrine, and many
great signs and wonders took place through his body therein. Salutation to Cotylus.
And on this day also Saint Abba Heroda became a martyr. This holy man was from the
city of Sebastia and he lived in the days of the persecution of the Christians by Diocletian,
the infidel; now he was God-fearing from his youth. One day whilst he was lying upon his
bed, and thinking about God’s good pleasure, he said in his heart, “What doth it profit me
to live in this fleeting world? I have heard the voice of my Lord Jesus Christ, Who saith in
the Holy Gospel, ’He who denieth not this world and what is therein is not able to devote
himself to Me (Matthew 16:24). And now, I will arise, and I will go and pour out my
534

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
blood for the Name of my Lord Jesus Christ.” And as he was thinking these thoughts in
his heart, behold Saint Michael, the archangel, came to him, and said unto him, “Peace be
unto thee, O holy and blessed Abba Heroda! Be not afraid, for behold our Lord Jesus
Christ hath prepared for thee a crown and a throne of glory, in the kingdom of the
heavens. I am Michael, the archangel, and I will go with thee to the place of torture, and
no torture whatsoever shall prevail over thy holy flesh.” And when Saint Michael had said
these things to him, he gave him the benediction of peace and went up into heaven. And
the blessed Abba Heroda went outside his city, a little to the west, and turning his face
towards the east he prayed, saying, “I beseech Thee, O Father, Sustainer of the universe,
and Thee, O Only Son, my Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise and all blessing from my
mouth, for to Thee praise is meet, I beseech Thee to strengthen me so that I may finish that
which I have determined to do for Thee.” And having said this he went to the governor’s
Council, and cried out boldly, saying, “I am a Christian.” And the governor said unto him,
“So thou art a Christian? Where is thy country? Who art thou? What is thy name? And
what is thy nation?” And Saint Abba Heroda answered and said unto him, “I am a man of
the city of Sebastia and from the province of Behensa, and from my youth I have been a
soldier in the service of the king.” And Lucianus the governor said unto him, “Art thou
ready to sacrifice to the gods Apollo and Artemis? If thou wilt do this I will promote thee,
and I will honor thee more than any other soldier, and I will give thee much money.” And
Saint Abba Heroda answered and said unto him, “O fool, it is written in the Holy
Scriptures thus: Woe be unto the man whose confidence is in man and blessed is the man
whose confidence is in God (Psalm 40:4), and in the Name of the God of heaven and
earth. I will not offer sacrifice to unclean idols, for my hope is God.” And straightway the
governor was wroth, and he commanded his soldiers to scourge him, and to torture him.
And they beat the saint with rods of iron, and with stakes of the thorn tree, until his blood
flowed down on the ground like water; but the saint suffered no pain whatsoever from
these tortures, for God was with him. And straightway Saint Michael the archangel came
down to him from heaven, and he touched the body of the saint, and healed his wounds,
and made him whole. When the people saw this miracle they believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ, and became martyrs; and they were in number five hundred men. And when the
governor became tired of torturing him he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with
the sword. Thereupon the soldiers put a bridle in his mouth, and they carried him away to
cut off his head with the sword. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him and said
unto him, “Peace be unto thee, O blessed Heroda! I am Christ thy God; fear not, for a
throne hath been prepared for thee with the saints in the heavens. Verily I say unto thee
that whosoever shall commemorate thy toil, and make an offering, and give alms to the
poor on the day of thy commemoration, shall not have one barren animal among his flocks,
and sons shall not be wanting in his house, and Satan shall never have any power over any
of his works. Or whosoever shall write the history of thy strife and martyrdom, his name
will I write in the Book of Life, and I will destroy the bond of his debt. I will deliver from
all his tribulation the man who is in tribulation, when he maketh mention of thy name; and
whosoever shall celebrate thy commemoration I will forgive all his transgressions. My
peace shall be with thee.” When our Redeemer had said these things He went up into
heaven with great glory. And Saint Abba Heroda rejoiced with a great joy at the end of his
fight, and he turned to the people who were following him, and said unto them, “If there be
among you a man who feareth God, let him take my body and lay it up by him; for a great
blessing shall rest upon the place wherein my body resteth.” And straightway he stretched
out his neck, and they cut off his holy head with the sword, and he received the crown of
535

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens on the twenty-fifth day of the month of Genbot.
And after seven months his kinsfolk came and took the body of the saint, and brought it to
the city of Sebastia and laid it in a shrine, which they had built for it; and through it many
signs and miracles took place, and many sick folk were healed. Salutation to Abba
Heroda. Salutation to the thirty thousand souls who were hacked to pieces with knives, or
died by the sword.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Balanus, and ‘Alontran (Elantherius), and
Romanus, and two hundred and fifty martyrs, and the Emperor Constantine, and his
mother Helena.
And on this day our Lord planted pieces from Joseph’s rod in the place Bisos, and they
grew and became trees.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 26
(June 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Thomas the apostle and martyr, who was called “Didymus,” that is to say
“Twin,” became a martyr, after he had preached in the country of India and Kantara. And
this saint having arrived in the country of India, made himself a slave of a certain governor,
whose name was Lucius; now that governor was a friend of the king. And he asked
Thomas, saying, “Tell me what handicraft thou knowest.” And Thomas said unto him, “I
am an architect, and I can build temples and palaces. I am also a carpenter and I can make
implements for use in the fields, and seats, and other things [in wood]. I am also a
physician, and I can heal the sick who are smitten with sores.” And when his master heard
the words of Thomas, he was pleased exceedingly, and said, “I have gotten a slave who
will be of use to the king.” And at that time that governor set out to go to the king, and he
left Saint Thomas to build in the house. And Saint Thomas began to teach the mistress of
the governor the way of God, and he commanded her to walk in purity, and he made her to
understand the mystery of the Son of God; and she believed on his words, and many of the
men of the house also believed. And when Thomas’s master returned from the king, and
saw Saint Thomas the apostle, he said unto him, “O wicked slave, where is the fine work
which thou didst tell me thou wouldst make for me?” And Thomas answered and said
unto his master, “My lord, I have not lied unto thee. As for the temples and palaces which
I have built [for thee] they are the souls who have become temples for the King of glory,
and the ploughing implements which I have fashioned for thee are the Holy Gospels which
shall plough up the thorny growth and weeds of sin. And the medicines, and the means of
healing, are the Holy Mysteries, the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which heal
those who have been poisoned with the deadly poison of sin.” And when the governor
heard this he commanded the soldiers to lay him down on the ground, and to tie his hands
and feet together with ropes, and to drag him along on the lower part of his back, and to tie
him by these ropes to a stake, and to cut off his skin with knives, and to fill the inside of
his body with salt, and vinegar, and the dust of burnt bricks; and they did as the governor
536

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
commanded, and the saint endured all these things with the endurance which was from
God. And when his mistress saw them flaying him from the window of her house, she fell
down straightway, and delivered up her soul [to God]. And when Lucius knew that his
wife was dead, he was exceedingly sad. And as for Saint Thomas, the apostle, God cooled
his wounds and healed his body. And Lucius said unto him, “Behold, my wife hath died
through thee, and if thou wilt raise her up from the dead, I will believe in thy God.” And
Saint Thomas, the apostle, came to her, and he laid his skin upon her, saying, “O Arsonia,
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, rise up!” And she opened her eyes straightway, and
she rose, and stood up, and did homage to Saint Thomas, the apostle; and when Lucianus
(sic) saw this, he believed on our Lord Jesus Christ. And all the men of his house and all
the men of the city believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and Thomas baptized them in the
Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit; and he appointed bishops and priests
over them, and built churches for them. And [he remained] with them for four months, and
confirmed them in the True Faith, and on everyone who was sick, no matter what the
sickness was, he laid his skin, and he became healed straightway. Then the saint went
forth from them and came to the city of Kontaria. And as he was going in he found al old
man weeping bitterly, and the saint said unto him, “Why dost thou weep in this manner?”
And the old man answered and said unto him, “I had three sons whom the king slew for the
sake of their money. And I am in debt to certain men but have not the wherewithal to pay
them. If only one of these sons had been left to me, he would have helped me to live.”
And the saint gave him his skin, and said unto him, “Lay this upon thy sons”; and when the
man did as the saint commanded him, the three sons rose up from the dead straightway.
And this miracle was noised abroad immediately in all the cities. And the priests of the
idols were filled with wrath, and they stoned Saint Thomas, the apostle, with stones, and
their hands withered. And they all believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Saint
baptized them with Christian baptism, and he taught them the Law of the Church. And
after this Thomas went to the city of Kenas, and to the city of Makedonya, and he preached
to the men therein in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. And when the kings and
governors heard about them, they seized him, and shut him up in prison. Now the king had
a wife, and she and many of the people who were with her came unto the saint secretly, in
prison; and he taught them the way of God, and many believed on his words. And the king
was exceedingly angry because of his wife, but he could not kill the saint among his
people, and therefore he had him taken outside the city; and he commanded four (?) of his
soldiers to spear him with their spears, and they speared him until he delivered up his soul.
And the king’s son stood by looking on at them. And when the men of the city knew
[this], they came to deliver Thomas from the hands of the soldiers, and they found that he
had delivered up his soul; then they swathed him for burial and laid him in one of the royal
tombs. Then a Satan leaped upon the king’s son, and he fell into an epileptic fit. And [the
servants of the king] came to the body of Saint Thomas, the apostle, to take away a little
piece of his grave clothes, to hang over the body of the king’s son. And when they opened
the door of the tomb, they could not find the body of the saint therein, for God had
translated it; and they took some of the dust from his tomb in faith, and they hung it up
over the king’s son, and he recovered immediately. And Saint Thomas the apostle
appeared unto many of the men of that city, and made them to know that he was alive, and
that our Lord Jesus Christ had received him, and he commanded them to be strong in the
True Faith, in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost.
The First Miracle of Saint Thomas. There was a certain God-fearing priest of the country
of Egypt who went to the country of India to trade. And on the twenty-sixth day of the
537

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
month of Genbot, which is the night of the festival of Saint Thomas, the apostle, he saw
many people assembling on the bank of the river, wherein was an island on which Saint
Thomas was, and at that moment a mighty wind storm came, and swept the water away.
And all the people set out and went into the church of Saint Thomas, which was on the
island, and they found the verger of the church had died at that very moment; and they
swathed him for burial, and buried him, and they prayed all that night. And on the
following day, which was the twenty-seventh day of the month of Genbot, and the festival
of Saint Thomas, they partook of the Offering. And when the consecration was over, and
the prayer of breaking the bread was said, they placed the Holy Body of our Lord in the
hand of Saint Thomas, the apostle, the hand being alive and undecayed, and the people
came one by one to received the Holy Mysteries from his hand. And as they were
receiving the Offering, there came a certain man from among the laity to receive, and the
palm of the saint’s hand was closed tightly over the Holy Body. And they all cried out
“Kyrie-eleison” many times, and they prayed for a long time, and [then] the palm of the
saint’s hand opened, and administered the Holy Mysteries to that man, and all the people
likewise received the Holy Mysteries; and they went out from the church, and returned to
their houses in the peace of God. And at that very moment the storm of wind returned and
brought back the water to is former place and height; and this has happened each year and
it happeneth at the present day. Salutation to Thomas, who was prepared to thrust his hand
into the wound made by the spear in the Lamb.
[The scribe has omitted nos. 2-6 of the Miracles of St. Thomas. They will be found in the
Gedle Hawaryat, ed. Budge, Contendings of the Apostles, 1899-1901, Vol 2, pp. 419-455.]
And on this day also are commemorated Alphaeus, the martyr, and Zacharias, the
anchorite, and Saint ‘Arsonwa, the wife of Lucius (or, Lucianus), the governor. Salutation
to ‘Arsonwa.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 27
(June 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba John, the thirtieth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This saint was a Christian, and a good man, and he became a monk in his
early years, and he fought a strenuous spiritual fight. Then he shut himself up in a cell, but
his knowledge and his excellence became noised abroad, and they seized him and made
him Archbishop of Alexandria, and during the days of his office he composed many
Homilies. And God exalted the horn of the Church in the days of this father; now, the
emperor who reigned in his days was Anastasius, a believer and a just man. And Saint
Abba Severus, Archbishop of the city of Antioch, wrote an epistle on the True Faith to this
father Abba John, wherein he said, “Our Lord Christ, our God, after His union, is One
Essence (or, being), without mixture, even according to the belief of our fathers Abba
Cyril, and Abba Demetrius, and Abba Dioscoros.” And Abba John and all his bishops
received the letter, and thanked God and glorified Him because of the conversion of the
538

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
members who were separated, and who had come into their proper places. Then this father
Abba John wrote an answer to this letter, with words full of the grace of the True Faith,
concerning the unity of the Godhead of God, One Essence, and concerning the Incarnation
of the Son of God in the nature of man, and how He is one with the Godhead, without
separation, and without mingling, and without change, and that He is One and not Two.
And he anathematized all those who separate our Lord Christ, or who mix His natures.
And he anathematized all those who say that He Who suffered, and died, and was crucified
for the children of men, was a mere man, or those who attribute suffering to the Divine
Nature. On the contrary, by the True Faith we know that it was God, the Word, Who
suffered for us in the flesh, which He took from us. And this is the path of the kingdom,
and he who walketh therein shall never go astray, and never stumble. And when Abba
Severus read the Epistle of this Saint Abba John, he received it with great satisfaction and
pleasure, and he read it publicly in the city of Antioch; and there were peace and
agreement in the city of Alexandria concerning the True Faith. And this father continued
to teach the people and his flock for eleven years, and he admonished them, and protected
them, and confirmed them in the True Faith, and he died in peace. Salutation of John who
shut himself in his cell, until they elected him Archbishop of Alexandria.
And on this day also died Lazarus, the just man, the brother of Mary and Martha, having
been appointed Bishop of the city of Cyprus, after our Lord rose from the dead. Our Lord
suffered in that week, and this saint followed the Apostle from that time. After the Holy
Spirit, the Paraclete, had descended upon the Apostles, they laid their hands upon him, and
made him Bishop of the city of Cyprus. And he guarded his flock well, and he sat for forty
years and died in peace. Salutation to Lazarus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Ginbot 28
(June 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Kerlos (Cyril) and his five and forty sons became martyrs.
[A certain Paul and his forty-five sons are according to the Bodleian MS. to be
commemorated on the 28th day of Ginbot.]
And on this day they commemorate the honorable fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Salutation to Kerlos (Cyril). Salutation to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
And on this day also died Abba Macarius of the monastery of Abba Pachomius. Abba
Anthony, the archimandrite of that monastery, saith, “There came unto me certain monks,
saying: Behold the departure of Brother Mercorios draweth nigh.” And I went to him so
that I might receive his blessing, and I found him unconscious (?), but his soul was not
separated from his body. And we sat with him for three nights without eating. And on the
third day he came to himself, and he drew a breath, and opened his eyes. When he saw me
he said unto me, “Why have ye gathered together about me?” And we talked about all his
labors, and we asked him to tell us what he had seen, and he told us how an awe-inspiring
539

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
man had come to him, and taken his soul, and had shown him the torture of sinners, and
the reward of the righteous. Then he lamented over his soul and turned his face
downwards to the earth, and he said unto us, “Brethren, go ye into the abode of Abba
George, of the desert of Harasit, for I heard the angel who was with me saying, ‘Take back
Mercorios and bring George.’” Now this George was always fighting the spiritual fight, in
a little cave in the Desert of Salt, and at length his body shriveled up, and when the
brethren went they found him dead; and they brought him to the monastery and buried him
there. And this brother had afflicted his body so heavily with ascetic labors that he became
like dry wood. And then he made an agreement with me that he should go to the desert,
and he said unto me, “On the fourteenth day of the month of Nehasse, come to me and
thou wilt find me.” And on the day, which he had appointed to me I went to him, and I
found him, and he said unto me, “I am going to die and to depart to my fathers. And three
oxen shall come to thee, and do thou lift my body on to their backs, and they shall lead
thee to the monastery, by the Will of God, and bury me by my abode”; and it happened
even as he said, and innumerable signs and wonders were made manifest at his tomb.
And on this day also died Saint Amette Christos, the woman who fought the spiritual fight,
and rejected the world, and vanquished the carnal desire, even as Abba Daniel hath related
unto us, saying: When I was living in the desert of ‘Aaref, and was walking about at night
by the light of the moon, I saw the figure of a man sitting on a hill, and his hair entirely
covered his body. And I said in my heart, I will go and see what this is, and I went close to
the figure to look at it. When it saw me it withdrew into a hollow of the rock, and
straightway I knew that the figure was a man. And I said unto him, “I entreat thee, O man
of God, to come out so that I may receive thy blessing”; but he remained silent. And I
asked him to do so again and again, and then he said unto me, “Forgive me, O father, but I
cannot come out.” And I said unto him, “Why not?” And he said unto me, “Because I am
a woman, and I am naked.” When I heard this I took off the garment, which I had about
me and I threw it to her, and she put it on; and she came out and we prayed. And I said
unto her, “Tell me, O my mother, why thou hast come out here, and how thou didst find
this hollow.” And she said unto me, “I was a virgin in my father’s house, and I lived in
Jerusalem, and there was a certain monk who visited me frequently and who held converse
with me. And after few days I went and lived with him. And I saw him weeping, and
confessing his sin before God; when I knocked he did not open to me, but he continued to
weep and to repent. When I heard him I said in my heart, ‘Why do I not weep and repent
for my shame and disgrace?’ And I departed quickly to my house, and I put on sackcloth
and I took a basket of beans and a vessel of water, and I prayed at the tomb of our Lord
Jesus Christ, saying, ‘O mighty and powerful God, Who art everlastingly marvelous, Who
dost save those who are destroyed, and dost raise up those who have fallen, and Who dost
hearken unto those who cry unto Thee, send forth Thy compassion and Thy righteousness
to save Thine handmaiden, who doth put her trust in Thee, and visit Thy wretched
handmaiden, and accept my repentance, and bless this food and this vessel of water so that
they may last me for the rest of my days, so that my thoughts about the salvation of my
soul may not be brought to naught through my belly.’ And I went to Golgotha, and prayed
this prayer, and I went forth and cast myself upon God, and I came to Jericho, and I went
on until I reached the Red Sea. Thence I came into this desert, and I found this hollow in
the hill, and I said, ‘This is my habitation, which God hath prepared for me.’ And behold,
for eight and thirty years I dwelt in this desert, and I have never seen any man save
thyself. And this basket of beans and this vessel of water whereon I live have neither
become exhausted nor diminished during these eight and thirty years; my apparel became
540

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
old and worn out, but this hollow hath taken the place of apparel, and become a covering
for me; and neither the heat of the sun in summer nor the cold of the winter have troubled
me all my days.” After this she besought me to eat and to drink, and I ate from the basket,
and I drank from the vessel, and their contents were not diminished, and I gave thanks to
God. I wanted to leave my garment with her, but she refused to accept it, saying, “Bring
me a beautiful one.” Then I went to the monastery, and told the abbot, and he cried out,
saying, “He who hath two garments let him give one to him that hath none”; and they
brought to him what he wanted. And having taken them I departed straightway so that I
might see Amatte Christos. And I toiled very hard in searching for her, but I count not find
her. And after a few [days] certain old men came and said, “As we were journeying along
the road of the Red Sea, in the Tanitic Desert, we saw a woman sitting by a rock towards
eventide, and we ran so that we might be blessed by her, and she fled and withdrew into a
cave, and we went close to the mouth of the cave but could not see her. And we found a
basket of beans and a vessel of water, and we ate, and the beans came to an end
immediately. And we stayed there all night until the morning, and we searched for the
saint, so that we might be blessed by her, and we found her dead, and her hair covered her
body. And we bowed low, and buried her in the cave and covered her face with a stone,
and we came away blessing God that He had thought us worthy to find her, and to bury the
blessed saint.” When I heard this I knew that she must be the woman whom I found. And
I told the old men what she had told, me, and they glorified God Who had helped the weak
vessel to overcome the Enemy and all his fiends. Salutation to ‘Amette Christos.
And on this day also the body of the holy and honorable Abba Epiphanius arrived in the
city of Cyprus. Now this saint died on the eighteenth (sic) day of the month of Genbot,
whilst he was on the ship, and before he arrived at the city of Cyprus, according to what
Saint John, the Mouth of Gold (i.e. Chrysostom), had prophesied concerning him, that is to
say, that he would not reach his Episcopal throne [again]. And having died during the
voyage, they carried him in the ship, and brought him to the city of Cyprus. And the
priests, and all the people, came with the Book of the Gospels, and crosses, and lamps, and
censers, and incense, and hymns of praises, and psalms, and laments, and dirges, and they
bore along the body of the pure saint, and finally laid it in the church. And the priests
wanted to dig a grave for him in the church, but two deacons, whom the saint had
excommunicated some time before because of their evil work, opposed their wish, and
prevented those who wished to dig a grave for him from doing so. And the body remained
in the church four days, and did not emit the odor which dead bodies are wont to emit, but
it remained as if the saint were asleep. And a certain holy deacon rose up, and said unto
the holy body, “I know that thou enjoyest grace before God, and that thou art able to
overcome all the evil men who oppose thee”; and then he seized the pick and smote the
ground therewith. And behold straightway the two wicked deacons fell upon their faces on
the ground, and they were nigh to died; and men carried them into their houses, and they
died on the third day. And the priests swathed the body of the saint with beautiful and
costly cloths, and they anointed it with divers sweet unguents, and they laid it in a noble
stone coffin, and then they buried him in the church. And there appeared from out of his
body great signs and miracles similar unto those, which he had been wont to perform
before his death. Salutation to the arrival of the body in the city of Cyprus, O Epiphanius.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Senta, and ‘Agabos the martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
541

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Ginbot 29
(June 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the Birth of our Lord and God and Redeemer, Jesus
Christ; the sons of the Church celebrate it each month, and beg for mercy and forgiveness
for their sins. Salutation to Thy Birth, O our Lord.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Simon, of the monastery of Antioch. The
name of the father of this saint was John, and the name of his mother was Martha, and
through him signs and wonders took place. Thus before his mother conceived him, Saint
John the Baptist came to her in a dream, and told her about the birth of this John, and he
revealed unto her what would happen to him. And having been born, and his days being
six years, Simon departed to the monastery of Antioch, and brought himself under the yoke
of the monastic life; and he became an ascetic and fought a strenuous spiritual fight. And
the angels appeared unto him, when he was asleep, on several nights, and taught him how
to fight the spiritual fight, even as they had taught Abba Pachomius. And they revealed to
this saint the work which cannot be destroyed, and the strife of the monastic life, and they
gave him strength, and this saint fought a sublime and superhuman fight, for did not the
angels bring unto him spiritual food at all times? And after very great strife, he went up on
a pillar [and lived there] for seven years, and then he went to a larger (higher?) pillar and
stood on it for eight years. Then he departed to a mountain and lived in it for twenty years
inside [a house] of stones, which he made for himself, and he did not go outside it until the
end of the twenty years. Then he went up on the top of a large (high?) pillar, and he stood
up on the front of it for five and forty years; and all the days of his life were five and eighty
years. [He lived] in his father’s house for six years, and nine and seventy years he passed
in the spiritual fight. As for his miracles, who can describe them? Now many of his
miracles are written in the story of his strife. And this father composed many Homilies,
and Admonitions, and Sayings, which are profitable for the monastic life, and for the
salvation of the soul; and he translated (or, expounded) many of the Books of the Church,
and died in peace. Salutation to Simon whose life, before he was conceived, was foretold
by John the Baptist.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba ‘Afse, and Abba Guba, who were of the
ninety saints of ‘Engelga, and Isaac, the monk, and the death of Alexander the king, the
son of Philip.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

542

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Ginbot 30
(June 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the pure and holy father Abba Michael, the sixty-eighth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This father was a learned man, and he studied the Books of the Church
from his early years, and many of them he knew by heart. And his pure soul desired to
fight the spiritual fight under the divine rule of the monastic life, and to become a soldier
of God from his early years. And he went to the desert of Scete and dwelt near the
monastery of Saint Abba Macarius for many years, and he was made a priest. And after
this he went to the city of Sengar of the country of Egypt, and he shut himself up in a cell
for a period of forty years, and considerably more, and he fought a great spiritual fight in
that cell. And the fame of him, and of his virtues, and his righteousness and knowledge,
became noised abroad, and the bishops and the elders of the people agreed together and
they seized him and made him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And in his
archiepiscopal office he walked in the right way in purity, and he rejected all worldly
possessions, and he did not possess himself of a single dirham or of a single dinar. Of the
stipend, which came to him as his due, he expended a little on his own maintenance, and
the rest he gave to the poor, and the needy, and the destitute. And he had made at his own
expense objects for sacred use in the churches and many books. And he read the
Scriptures frequently to the people, and he admonished them once each day from the
Scriptures and once by his own mouth. And having ended his good course God wished
him to rest from the toil of this world, and to receive the crown of life in the kingdom of
the heavens, and He brought upon him sickness for a day and a night, and he never spoke
again. And when he was dying he glorified God, and he made the sign of the Honorable
Cross over his face, and delivered his soul into the hand of God forever. And all the days
of his life were ninety years and eight months. Salutation to Michael.
And on this day also died the Apostle Sisticorus, one of the Seventy-two disciples. This
holy man followed our Lord Jesus Christ for a period of three years, and after the
Ascension of our Lord he followed the holy apostles. And he was filled with the gift of the
Holy Spirit, and he followed Saint Paul the apostle, and carried his Epistles to many cities,
and he taught many Jews and Gentiles, and baptized them with Christian baptism, and he
went into their synagogues in the countries of the East. And great tribulation and sorrow
came upon this saint, and then he died in peace.
And on this day also died Saint ‘Arwa, a fighter of the spiritual fight, and a conqueror of
the desire of the flesh, an Israelite woman...And there was a certain man in Israel who had
many possessions, and he had a wife whose name was ‘Arwa, and there was no woman
like unto her for grace and beauty in those days. And her husband departed on his business
to a far country, and he commanded his brother to take care for the ruling of his house.
And his brother came and said unto ‘Arwa, “I have loved thee for years, but I have been
afraid [to show] my love for thee because of thy husband; but now he hath departed, and is
far away, I want to lie with thee.” And ‘Arwa said unto him, “Even if my husband hath
departed, and is far sway, is God far away? Even if my husband cannot see me, God can
see me from heaven.” And he went forth from her, and a devil met him [and said unto him
. . .] “Get thee back to her, and I will perform all thy desire for thee.” And he went back to
her and said unto her, “Wilt thou consider [this]? If thou wilt lie with me I will treat thee
543

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
well, but if thou refusest me I will bring upon thee a beating.” And ‘Arwa said unto him,
“What canst thou bring upon me?” And the man said unto her, “I will set up against thee a
witness from among the nobles of Israel.” And she said unto him, “For what reason wilt
thou set up [this] witness against me?” And he said unto her, “Because thou hast married
another man.” And ‘Arwa said unto him, “I will not lie with thee. Thou art my husband’s
brother. Say what thou wishest, but God will deliver me from thy hand.” And when she
refused him, he went on the following day to the governor, and to the people, and they all
gathered together, and he said unto them, “The wife of my brother has married another
man whilst her husband is away traveling.” And they brought out ‘Arwa, and set up
witnesses, and the brother said unto them, “Did ye see her lying with a man?” And certain
false witnesses said, “We saw her lying with a man.” And the governor commanded them
to bring her outside [the city], and they dragged her by the neck of her garment. And the
governor and the people stoned her with stones, and the blood ran down from her face, and
she died, and they buried her because of her beauty. Now formerly the children of Israel
would not bury the dead body of a person whom they had stoned, but this woman they
buried. And a certain Egyptian merchant came that way with five loaded camels, and he
heard a voice in that grave, and he went to look at the grave, and he found ‘Arwa lying in
the grave, and her face was shining like the sun. And when she saw him she gave him her
hand, and she said unto him, “Lift me up, and give me water to drink.” And he lifted her
up, and gave her water to drink; and he took her to his abode, and had a physician brought,
and the physician healed her, and she became very much stronger then before. And the
Egyptian loved her, and said unto her, “Come, lie with me.” And ‘Arwa said unto him,
“Fear God and love thyself. Dost thou never think about the Day of Judgment, and the end
of the world? I will not lie with thee. Why should I wrong my husband?” And the
Egyptian left her, and went out. And the slave of the Egyptian, a Hebrew, came and said
unto her, “I want to marry thee.” And ‘Arwa said unto him, “Get thee gone from me, dog
that thou art!” And the Hebrew departed from her. And the Egyptian had a boy, an only
son, and he had no other child, and the Hebrew, the slave of the Egyptian, killed the boy
with a hatchet, and carried the body to the place where ‘Arwa slept, and laid it down by
her, and he placed the hatchet within reach of the grasp of her hand. Now the Hebrew
wished to kill ‘Arwa because she refused to lie with him. When the mother of the child
woke up, she missed her son, and wishing to give the child suck she searched for him and
found him dead by the bed of ‘Arwa, whom the Hebrew made out to have committed the
deed; and ‘Arwa herself lay there sleeping. And the mother of the child came out, and
wept with a loud voice, and all the people assembled, and came to ‘Arwa. And the
Egyptian said unto her, “Why hast thou done evil to me and killed my son? I saved thee
from death and raised thee up from the grave.” And ‘Arwa said unto the Egyptian, “Thou
didst entreat me well, and didst raise me up from the grave. Why should I kill thy son in
return for the good, which thou didst do me? Was it evil that I wished thee when some
time ago thou didst ask me to let thee marry me? Nay, I refused because I feared God.
Shall I commit a greater sin and kill a soul? I have not killed thy son.” And the Egyptian
said unto her, “Get thee out, and be gone from me”; and she went out. And he gave her
one hundred dinars wherewith to maintain herself, and he said unto her, “Be gone, for I
cannot contain myself in this matter; I know [not] what hath come upon me”, and she
departed. And as she was going along she came to a city where she saw a man being
hanged on a tree, and she said unto those who were hanging him up, “Why are ye hanging
that man?” And they said unto her, “Because he hath carried off our money”; and she said
unto them, “How much money hath he taken?” And they said unto her, “One hundred
544

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
dinars”; and she gave them the money, and said unto them, “Take him down from his
cross.” And the man from the cross went and said unto [his creditor], “Who paid thee my
debt of one hundred dinars and redeemed me?” [And his father said unto him], “I thy
father did not redeem thee, but a woman, a widow, redeemed thee.” And the young man
went and followed ‘Arwa, and he found her, and said unto her, “What beauty! I wish to lie
with thee.” And ‘Arwa said unto him, “I have delivered thee from the fire of earth, and
thou wishest to bring me into that which is in the heavens, and thou dost not counsel me
for good”; and when he saw that she feared God he left her. And he went to several of the
man on a ship in the sea, and he called them and said unto them, “There is a handmaiden
which I will buy with all my money, and I will sell her to you if ye will pay me my price”;
now he had seen ‘Arwa, and her beauty, and her pleasing face. And there was a certain
man there with much gold, that is to say one hundred dinars, and the man whom ‘Arwa had
redeemed from hanging sold her to that man with the money. And the man who bought
her made her to embark in a ship, and he loved her, and wanted to lie with her; and he took
her hand. And the sun became dark, and the winds blew with great violence, and the
waves rose up, and were about to sink the ship. And all those who were in the ship cried
out, and they wept, and prayed to God. And ‘Arwa said, “Thanks be to God, He who
putteth his trust in God shall not die, and he who believeth in Him shall not perish.” And
‘Arwa said unto those who were in the ship, “O ye who didst buy me wrongfully! O ye
who didst sell me wrongfully! I am not a handmaiden, but a woman who is her own
mistress. If ye will do what I tell you I will pray to God to guide you out of this
tribulation”; and they said, “We will do what thou tellest us to do.” And she said unto
them, “This man who sold me did so because I would not let him lie with me; this is an act
which God doth not desire.” And all the men brought out money, ten thousand dinars, and
they gave it to the man who had bought her, and he set her free. And ‘Arwa prayed to
God, and the storm died down, and the winds stood still, and there was a complete calm.
And they all loved her and wanted to fall upon her, and [each] of them said, “I, I.” Then
straightway there came a mighty wind, which broke their ship in pieces, and they were all
scattered about in the sea and they sank; and all their money was left with her. And she
made pantaloons, and oiled herself (?) like a man, and she arrayed herself in her apparel,
and departed in a ship. And she came to a large island, and a city of men, in the midst of
the sea, and she went on and came at length to the king. Now when the king saw ‘Arwa,
he thought that she was a young man, whose beard had not yet sprouted. And she said
unto the king, “Behold, my money is much, there is a ship full [thereof]. Those who
owned it have perished, and sunk in the sea, and as thou seest, I am left alone a weak
woman; and all the money, which they left, is with me in my hand. I am afraid that I shall
be destroyed, and I wish thee to take charge of it. I will write a letter, and will send to the
men belonging to the house of each of the dead men, and then their kinsfolk can come and
take the money [from thee], each man taking what is his.” And when the king saw that she
had not stolen their money, and that she was beautiful . . .he took all the money. And the
fear of God came upon ‘Arwa, and God heard her petition, and many sick persons were
healed by her prayers. And she went to the seashore, and entered a cave and lived [there]
praying to God. And the king of that island fell sick, and came [nigh unto] death. And all
the people gathered together and went to him, and they said unto him, “Behold, thou art
going to die; who wilt thou appoint to be king after thee?” And he answered and said unto
them, “There is a young man who brought me much money in a ship, and him do I appoint
to be king over you after me”; and they were all pleased, and they said, “He shall reign
after thee.” And they finished their business, and the king died. After this they made
545

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
‘Arwa to reign over them, and they believed her to be a young man, and she was worthy to
reign, and love for the kingdom entered into her heart. And again she thought in her heart,
saying, “The kingdom will make me to be remote from God,” and she wanted to refuse [to
reign] over them. And she gathered the people together, and said unto them, “Those
among you who have daughters, or sisters, adorn them with gold, and array them in
raiment of fine linen, and precious stones, and bring them hither to me; and the maiden
among them whom I shall choose shall be my wife.” And they all brought their sisters and
their daughters before her, even as she commanded them, and they were all adorned with
gold and gems, and they set them before ‘Arwa; and the mothers went forth leaving their
daughters with her. And ‘Arwa stripped off her apparel, and stood up naked before the
maidens; and when they saw that she was a very beautiful woman, they marveled and held
their peace. Then they said, “We are well pleased that she shall reign, and that she shall
not marry a man, and that she shall not assume the apparel of a man; we are well pleased
that she shall reign.” But she refused to do so, and went back to her cave. And the report
of her was heard in every country in those days, and of how she prayed to God, and healed
the sick by her prayer. And after many days the husband of ‘Arwa came from afar into his
house. Now he was silly, and blind and a paralytic, and he found there his brother, and he
said unto him, “What hast thou done with my wife ‘Arwa?” And his brother said unto
him, “We found thy wife lying with a man, and we stoned her and killed her”; and the
husband of ‘Arwa was silent. And after many days he heard the report of how she used to
heal the sick by her prayers. And the husband of ‘Arwa went to his brother, and entreated
him, saying, “There is a woman on a certain island who healeth the sick by her prayers,
and God heareth her prayer; take me thither.” And his brother said unto him, “Hast thou
strength enough to travel thither?” And the husband of ‘Arwa said unto him, “Let us go,
peradventure God will be merciful unto us”; and the two of them set out together. And
they met the young man whom ‘Arwa had redeemed with one [hundred] dinars. (Now he
had become blind), and also the Hebrew slave, who had slain the son of his mistress, and
had thrust the hatchet into the hand of ‘Arwa, and who was then leading his master the
Egyptian, (who was ill and blind). And the young man whom ‘Arwa had saved from his
cross was leading his father, and the brother of her husband, who had stoned her with
stones, was leading his brother, the husband of ‘Arwa. And they all arrive before her, and
came into her presence, and ‘Arwa knew them all, but they did not know her; and she went
back into her cave and then returned to them. And her husband said unto her, “Behold, I
will give thee all the money thou wishest; heal me.” And she said unto him, “I do not take
money from sick people, but I will take it from thee; there is much sin with thy brother, let
him describe everything which he hath done.” And the husband of ‘Arwa said unto [his
brother], “This woman speaketh well; confess all thy sin.” And the brother of ‘Arwa’s
husband said unto him, “I visited thy wife, and asked her to let me lie with her and she
refused me. And I set up four lying witnesses against her, and I made the people stone her
with stones, and I killed her.” And ‘Arwa’s husband said unto him, “Thou didst entreat her
evilly in killing my wife. We had the same father and the same mother, and as for what is
passed, what can I do? Let it be forgiven thee.” And ‘Arwa prayed to God, and her
husband’s eyes were opened, and his feet set free, and the whole body of the man whose
brother had killed ‘Arwa was made whole. Then the father of the young man whom she
had saved from crucifixion said unto her, “My son hath become blind; pray to God on his
behalf.” And ‘Arwa said unto him, “Thy son hath [committed] many sins; let thy son
confess the sins which he hath committed, and I will pray [for him].” And the blind man
said, “Thou sayest well; I will confess my sins. A certain woman was journeying along the
546

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
road, and she found me hung on a tree, and she redeemed me for one hundred dinars. And
I loved her and I wanted to lie with her, and she refused to let me. And I saw certain idle
seamen on a ship, and I called them and sold her to them for ten thousand dinars. And as
soon as I came away from them, my eyes went blind, and the dinars turned into stones.”
And ‘Arwa said unto the young man before his father, “Thou art a liar [by nature], but God
hath now made thee to speak openly”; and she prayed to God, and he was made whole, and
his eyes were opened. And then came the Egyptian, the master of the Hebrew slave, and
he said unto ‘Arwa, “Thou seest that my slave is blind; pray to God that He may heal
him.” Now the Egyptian did not know that ‘Arwa was the woman whom he had lifted up
out of the grave. And ‘Arwa said unto him, “His sin is great, and therefore he is blind and
sick; let him now confess everything which he hath done and I will pray for him.” And his
master said unto the Hebrew, “Tell thy transgressions, and if thou wilt not tell the, I will
leave thee here and return to my country.” And the Hebrew said to his master, “An
Israelite woman sojourned with us, and I asked her that I might lie with her, and she
refused me. And I killed thy son, and took him to her whilst she was sleeping, and I laid
him down by her, and I thrust the hatchet into her hand, and I wished thee to kill her
because she would not let me lie with her.” And having confessed his sin, ‘Arwa prayed to
God and the man was healed straightway. Now there were men of that island, and others,
near her, and when their business was finished they returned to their district. And her
husband was left alone with her, and she drew nigh unto him and said unto him, “Thy wife,
of whom thou speakest, was she like me?” And her husband answered and said unto her,
“Thy nose, and eyebrows, and eyes resemble hers, and if she were not dead and buried I
could imagine that thou wert she, and would grasp thee with my hands and carry thee off.”
And she said, “I am indeed thy wife ‘Arwa, whom they punished wrongfully, and who was
killed, and sold as a slave for thy sake. For thy sake I endured the sun, and the cold, and
the heat, and for thy sake I traveled over sea and land”; and when she had told him this
they were silent, and both of them wept. And after this he asked her that he might lie with
her, and she refused, and said unto him, “I cannot do it at this moment; I will wash and
come to thee.” And she rose up, and went to her cave and washed, and then came out.
And having dressed herself in clean apparel, she prayed to God, saying, “If Thou lovest me
receive my soul, and let me not lie again with a man”; and she bowed low and died. And
her husband came in and found her dead, and he buried her. Salutation to ‘Arwa.
And on this day also is commemorated Dimadis the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

547

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE TENTH MONTH
Senne 01
(June 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the consecration of the church of Laventius, in the country of Syria,
where many signs and wonders appeared. This holy man became a martyr in the city of
Tarablos, on the twenty-second day of the month of Hamle. And a certain Christian
woman, the wife of a very great nobleman, came, and having given much money to the
soldiers to be allowed to take his body she carried it away, and wrapped it in cloth of gold,
which belonged to her husband, and then she laid it in a coffer which was in her house, and
she hung a lighted lamp before it, and painted a picture of him. Now her husband was a
judge, and Diocletian was wroth with him and shut him up in prison in the city of Antioch.
And the woman having made ready for burial the body of the saint, entreated it honorably,
and wrapped it in cloth of gold. And the martyr of our Lord Jesus Christ, Saint Laventius,
did not wish her to remain unrewarded for the gifts which she had bestowed upon him, and
he rewarded her well in this world, for he delivered her husband from the prison house;
and assuredly he would also do good to her in the world which is to come, and make
intercession for her before our Lord Jesus Christ. And that night the saint appeared unto
the judge, her husband, in the prison house, and a great light rose upon him, until the whole
house was lighted up. Then he saw Saint Laventius in the form of a horseman, and light
was shining from him, and as he stood by him in the prison house, arrayed in cloth of gold,
the judge knew that this cloth of gold was his own apparel. And Saint Laventius, the
horseman, said unto the judge, “Grieve not, neither be sorrowful, for thou shalt be
delivered to-morrow, and thou shalt eat with the emperor at his table, and thou shalt go to
thy house.” And the judge was amazed at the many things which he saw that horseman do,
and at the light which rose over him, and at his coming in to him in the prison house, [the
doors] being shut, and at [the sight of] his own cloth of gold which he had left in his
house. And Saint Laventius hid himself (i.e. disappeared), and went to the emperor that
night. And he struck the emperor with his foot twice and thrice. And the Emperor
Diocletian woke up, and when he saw Saint Laventius, he was afraid and was greatly
terrified. And Saint Laventius said unto him, “When the morning hath come, bring out so
and so, the judge, from the prison house, and do him honor, and let him go to his house,
lest thou die an evil death and be destroyed.” And the emperor trembled before him, and
answered and said unto him, “Yea, my lord, everything which thou commandest me [to do]
I will do.” And when it was morning, the emperor sent and brought the judge out of the
prison house, and he paid him great honor, and arrayed him in splendid apparel, and he
made him to sit at meat at his own table, and he told him how the horseman had appeared
unto him. And the judge was silent, and marveled exceedingly; now the king saw that
Saint Laventius was an angel. And the judge answered, and said unto him, “I know
nothing whatsoever about all which thou sayest, and I do not know who it was that
appeared unto thee”; and the emperor did not dare to speak to him one word of abuse, but
he sent him to his own city, with great honor, because of his fear of him that had appeared
unto him. And as the judge was journeying along the road, the angel of God in the form of
Saint Laventius appeared unto him, and held converse with him, and he comforted him
548

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
until he arrived in his own city of Tarablos; then he hid himself (i.e. disappeared) from him
straightway. And the judge went into his house, and he embraced the men of his house,
and told them how that horseman had appeared unto him in the prison house, arrayed in
cloth of gold, and how he had promised him that he would deliver him from the prison
house, and how he had brought him out of his bondage in the morning, and how the
horseman had appeared unto him on the road wearing the cloth of gold. And his wife, who
knew that the horseman was Laventius, answered, and said unto him, “Yea.” Then she
took him into the shrine, to the picture of Saint Laventius, and as soon as he saw it he said,
“Verily this is he who appeared unto me.” Then she opened the coffer wherein was the
body of Saint Laventius, and he saw him wearing his cloth of gold; and he opened the
wrapping of his face, and he knew that it was he who had appeared unto him and delivered
him. And the judge asked his wife about the saint, and he said unto her, “Who is he?”
And she told him the history of the saint. And the judge praised his wife for what she had
done and he glorified God the Most High and Glorious, Who worketh miracles for His
saints. Then he commanded his wife to burn incense, and to keep a [lighted] lamp before
him, and she continued to do this until God destroyed Diocletian, the infidel. And they
built a church for the saint, and they translated his body thereto, and they laid him in it, and
they consecrated the church as it were this day; and many signs and miracles took place
therein through his body. Salutation to Laventius.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Joseph, the just, the son of Jacob-Israel, and
Asnet his wife. Salutation to Joseph. Salutation to ‘Asnet.
And on this day also is commemorated Thomas, the martyr, Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Cosmas, the martyr, of the city of Taha, in
Upper Egypt, and his companions. Salutation to Cosmas and homage to his companions.
Salutation to Bifamon, who fought a strenuous spiritual fight.
And on this day also was consecrated the first church which was built in the name of Saint
Bifamon, the martyr and fighter.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 02
(June 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the body of Saint John the Baptist and the body of Saint Elisha, the prophet,
the disciple of Elijah, the zealous, appeared in the city of Alexandria. In his days Julian,
the infidel, wished to [re] build the Temple of the Jews in Jerusalem, Vespasian, Emperor
of Rome, and his son Titus having destroyed it, for Julian, by the wickedness of his works,
wanted to make of no effect the word of the Lord which He spoke in the Holy Gospel,
saying, “There shall not be left here one stone upon another which shall not be
overthrown” (Matthew xxiv, 2). And Julian having thrice commanded the building of it, it
549

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
was destroyed. And the Jews said, “In this place there are some bodies of Christian elders,
and unless thou dost cast them out the Temple cannot be [re] built.” And Julian
commanded them to cast out the bodies from that place and to burn them with fire. And
when they cast the bodies out they found the bodies of Saint John the Baptist and Elisha
the prophet, and they wanted to burn them with fire. And certain believers came and gave
the soldiers much money, and they took away the bodies of the saints, after the soldiers
had made them swear that they would [not] leave them in that city, so that the emperor
might not hear of it, and destroy them. Here is the story of the Emperor Julian. His
enemies having surrounded him in the fight, God sent Mercurius in the spirit, after he had
received the crown of martyrdom, and he speared Julian in the neck with his spear, and he
died. Before Julian the infidel died, he took a handful of his own blood, and scattered it in
the air, saying, “Jesus, take this soul of mine which Thou hast given to me”; and
straightway he died an evil death. And those believing men brought the bodies of the
saints, John the Baptist, and Elisha the prophet, to the city of Alexandria, to Saint Abba
Athanasius, and he rejoiced over them with a great joy; and he laid them by him, until he
could build a church for them. And one day when Abba Athanasius was sitting in the
garden of his fathers, his scribe Theophilus being with him, he said, “If God giveth me
good days, I will build in this place a church in the names of Saint John the Baptist and
Elisha the prophet, and I will lay their bodies in it.” And Saint Theophilus recorded the
words, which Abba Athanasius spoke, and Abba Athanasius built a church; and he took
many of his own priests, and all the Christian folk and he went to the bodies of the saints,
and carried them with great honor, and bore them to the church. And as they were passing
along they came to a house wherein was an old woman who had suffered for forty days
with the pains of labor, and she cried out in pain by day and by night until she was all but
dead. And when she heard the singing of the priests, as they passed with the bodies of the
saints, she looked from the window of her house, and asked [her servants], saying, “What
is this?” And they said unto her, “The bodies of the saints, John the Baptist, and Elisha the
prophet.” And straightway she brought herself to believe, saying, “O John, thou saint of
God, if thou wilt deliver me from this tribulation I [will become] a Christian.” And before
she had finished saying these words with her mouth, straightway she gave birth to a boy,
and she called him “John”; and after this, she and all the men of her house were baptized
with Christian baptism. And Abba Athanasius laid the bodies of the saints in the church,
and great signs and miracles appeared through them. And Saint Abba Theophilus, and
many of the saints, saw Saint John the Baptist and Elisha the prophet; and they went round
in the church with the archbishop, and consecrated the church. And the person of Saint
John the Baptist was hairy, and his beard fell down upon his breast; and Elisha the prophet
was tall, and his head was noble. Afterwards when Saint Abba Macarius the bishop
became a martyr the monks placed his body with theirs. Salutation to the appearance of
the bodies of Saint John the Baptist and Elisha the prophet, in Alexandria.
And on this day also are commemorated Kerlos (Cyril), and ‘Akeltus the martyr, and
Questus (Caustus) the monk.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

550

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Senne 03
(June 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy, pure and devoted fighter Martha. This holy woman was a native
of the city of Mesr (Cairo), and her parents were very rich. She loved fornication and
unchastity from her youth, and the sons of the elders and honorable men of the city used to
visit her secretly; and when her works became known, she became bolder in her deeds of
impurity, and committed fornication openly. And when the festival of the birth of our
Lord Jesus Christ came, she went to the church and wished to go inside, but the verger of
the church said unto her, “It is not meet for thee to go into the holy church, for thy deeds
are impure.” And as she continued to insist that he should let her go into the church, and
he prevented her, a fierce fight broke out between them. When the bishop heard the
commotion, he rose up, and came to the door of the church to see what had happened.
When he saw Martha he said unto her, “Dost thou not know that the house of God is a pure
and holy house? Thou art unclean, and thou art not fit to enter the house of God.” And
she said unto him, “Henceforward I will not go back to my sin, but if thou wilt receive me
I will repent and become a nun.” And the bishop said unto her, “I will not believe thee
unless thou wilt bring here thy wealth, and all thy goods, and all thy possessions, so that
we may burn them with fire.” And she went to her house quickly, and she took all her
money, and jewels, which were of great price, and she brought them to the bishop, and cast
them down before him; and the bishop commanded his servants to burn all the possessions
which she had brought with fire, and they burned them before her. Then the bishop shaved
off the hair of her head, and taking off her garments he dressed her in sackcloth of hair, and
he sent her to a house for virgins, where she fought a great spiritual fight there. And she
frequently rebuked herself, saying, “If they will not let thee alone in this place, which is
built of stones and clay, how wilt thou live in that habitation of the beings of light? What
shall I do? Who will be surety for me? Who will intercede for me?” And she said in her
prayer, “My Lord, even though it was possible for me to bear disgrace at the hands of the
verger of the church, I entreat Thee, O God, my Lord, do not put me to shame before Thine
angels, and Thy saints.” And this holy woman continued the spiritual fight for five and
twenty years, and at length she conquered Satan, the Adversary; and she did not go out of
the door of the nunnery during the whole of this period. And at length she died in peace.
Salutation to Martha.

And on this day also Karyon (Gorion), and Hilarion, the bishop, became martyrs. This
saint rebuked the Emperor Julian, the infidel, for worshipping idols. And Julian, the
infidel, answered and said unto him, “Thou tellest me that I am an infidel because I do not
worship Him Whom the Jews crucified; but through much torture, and tribulation, I shall
see thee forsaking the worship of Him.” Then the emperor handed him over to one of his
officers, and commanded him to torture Hilarion very severely all day long, and to show
him no mercy. And the officer took him, and tortured him with every kind of torture, and
this he continued to do for a full year; and during the whole of that year he never ceased to
torture him, even for a single day. He threw him into the fire, but Hilarion stood up in it,
and glorified God, and ascribed holiness to Him. Through this miracle very many men
believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and became martyrs; and after this the officer took him
551

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
out of the fire, and he was like one who cometh forth from a garden. And when the officer
was tired of torturing him, and not knowing what else he could do to him, he commanded
the soldiers to cut off his holy head with the sword; and they did so, and he received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven. Salutation to Hilarion.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 04
(June 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Sanusi, from the city of Balkim, became a martyr. When this saint was a
young man he used to tend his father’s sheep, and he used to give his food to the shepherds
each day, and fast himself until the evening, now his parents did not know what he did, and
he used to visit the sick, and those who were in prison. One day the angel of God appeared
unto Sanusi and said unto him, “Rise up, and go to the governor, and confess thy God, so
that thou mayest receive the crown of martyrdom.” When he woke from his sleep, he told
his mother how the angel of God had appeared unto him, and she was sorry and wept; and
she was unable to hold him back. And he heard about a certain holy woman of the city of
Sabra, whose name was Maria, and who used to receive the poor and pilgrims into her
house, and show them many acts of charity; to her this saint went, and he made an
agreement with her that they should receive the crown of martyrdom. And they went
together to the governor whose name was ‘Arsanios, and they found him in a ship which
was lying by the side of the river bank at Mesr (Cairo), and they cried out boldly, “We are
Christians.” And the governor commanded the soldiers to torture them with every kind of
torture, and Saint Maria delivered up her soul under the torture and received the crown of
martyrdom; but by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ which dwelt on him Saint Sanusi
endured the torture. When the governor was tired of torturing him he sent him, with many
[other] martyrs, to the governor of the city of Antinoe, who tortured him very severely.
And he commanded the soldiers to bore holes in the soles of his feet, [and to tie a rope to
them,] and to drag him round about the city; and although they did as he commanded, no
injury came to Hilarion (sic). After this he brought a sorcerer from ‘Akmim, and he
concocted a magical drink for him wherein poison was mixed, and commanded Hilarion
(sic) to drink it. And the saint having made over it the sign of the Cross drank it, and no
harm came to him. When the governor was tired of torturing him, he commanded the
soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and they cut off his head with the sword; and he
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven. And the sorcerer also
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, and received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of
heaven. Salutation to Sanusi, and to Maria, and to the Sorcerer.
And on this day also John, of the city of ‘Arakli, became a martyr. The father of this saint
was Zacharias, governor of the city of ‘Antarsen and ‘Albia, and the name of his mother
was “Elisabeth.” And when they were blessed with this boy, on the fifth day of this
month, they called his name “John”; for his father and his mother both wished him to have
the name of John, who baptized the Lord. And they brought him up in the admonition and
fear of God, and they taught him the Books of the Church, and the knowledge of numbers,
552

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and all kinds of philosophy. His mother watched over him carefully all his days so that he
should not step aside from the path of God, and his father also admonished him. After this
his father died, when the young man was twenty years old, and he became judge in his
father’s place, and all the countries of Pontus, and Harakli, and other cities continued to be
under his authority. Whilst matters were thus, Satan appeared unto him in the form of an
angel, and said unto him, “Thus saith God: Go thou to the city of Antioch and marry the
daughter of Numerianus the king, so that thou thyself mayest reign, and may sit with him
upon the same throne.” And the saint pondered and said, “Is this an angel [of God] or an
angel of Satan? As, however, I heard the Name of God from his mouth I will go to the city
of Antioch”; and then he went and met Diocletian, who loved him and paid him honor
from the day he saw him. And on the following day, when they were sitting at meat
together, the wicked Diocletian ordered his servants to bring in Apollo, and they brought
him in before him. When the saint saw him, he made a motion of contempt at the idol, and
he cursed the emperor and hated him for this. When Diocletian saw what the saint had
done, he was filled with very great wrath, and he bound John in prison. And whilst John
was in prison, our Lord appeared unto him in a chariot of light; now there were angels with
Him, and He took him, and kissed him mouth to mouth, and promised him many things.
On the following day Diocletian sent and brought him out of prison, and said unto him,
“Come and worship Apollo and Artemis”; and the saint refused to do so, saying, “How can
I worship the work of the hand?” And the emperor spoke many persuasive words unto
him, and he wished to be rid of him. Then he sent him to the country of Egypt, giving him
power to levy taxes. And Diocletian sent a letter concerning him to Soryakos, the
governor of Egypt, saying, “I have given power to John, the Haraklian, over all the taxes
from Jerusalem to Ethiopia, and let the people pull down the temples and destroy them
utterly.” And the saint accepted this pretence and pulled down the temples, and left them
in ruins. One day after this Soryakos, the governor, sat on the tribune in order to command
the cutting off of the heads of the martyrs. And straightway there came men from Upper
Egypt called Dioscoros, and Bifamon, and Harganus, and Kiros, and Julius, and
Alexander, and Joseph, and Isaac, and Stephen, and they cried out boldly, “We are
Christians”; and straightway the governor was wroth, and he tortured them without
sparing. And when Saint John saw this, he abandoned the office of his judgeship, and
cried out boldly, “I am a Christian.” And the governor was wroth, and commanded the
soldiers to bind him with iron fetters, and then he sent him to Arianus, the governor of
Ensna, who questioned him about all that had happened. When he heard John’s words, he
was wroth and commanded the soldiers to hang him on the henbaz, and to break him on
the iron wheel. Then he commanded them to take him off the henbaz, and to beat him on
his belly and head until his flesh melted, and the earth was soaked with his blood; and they
cast him into prison. A few days after this he commanded them to hack his body in pieces
with hatchets, and then he commanded them to bring a piece of sackcloth made of hair, and
to drag it over his wounds; and they also sprinkled hot ashes and coals of fire under his
back. And he also commanded them to bring pegs of iron, which had been heated, in the
fire, and to lay them on his face, and to drive them through his ears; and when they had
done this they cast him into prison. That night the angel of God appeared unto him and
gave him peace. And on the following day the governor had him brought out and he
tortured him with red-hot bars of iron. After all this, they bound his hands and his feet
with cords, and they tied him on to the back of a horse with his face turned downward
towards the earth. Then the executioner came and cut off his hands, and feet, and head,
with the sword; and he treated the two other men who were with him in like manner. Thus
553

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the saint finished his martyrdom and his good fight. Salutation to John, and to those who
were martyred with him. Salutation to Bifamon, and to his brethren, and to his mother.
And on this day also became martyrs ‘Akronius, and Dimunasia, his sister, and ‘Amoni
and Mina, the Egyptians and soldiers of the Emperor Diocletian. When the emperor cast
these saints into a pit of fire along with Abba ‘Ebsoy, the angel Gabriel came and brought
them forth from the flames. And when the saints came before the emperor, they cursed
him and said unto him, “Why dost thou delay day after day, and dost not bring to an end
our matter?” When the emperor heard this he was wroth, and he commanded the soldiers
to cut off their heads with a sharp sword, and to burn their bodies in the fire; [and they did
so,] and thus the saints finished their martyrdom, and kept the festival with the righteous in
the kingdom of heaven. Salutation to ‘Akronius, and to Dimunasia, his sister, and to
‘Amoni, and to Mina.
And on this day also became martyrs the pure Saint Sophia, the strenuous fighter, and her
brother Ammonius in the days of Diocletian, the infidel. This holy woman had Christian
parents, and having begotten her, they brought her up very carefully in the fear of God, and
they taught her the Books of the Church, and all the Law of the Apostles. When she
reached woman’s estate, they wanted to give her in marriage to a certain nobleman of the
city. When the saint of God knew this she rose up from where she was sitting, and turned
her face towards the East, and made one hundred prostrations and stood up and prayed for
a long time. And she said in her prayer, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living
God, Whose glory is great, guide Thou Thine handmaiden Sophia in Thy right path, so that
I may come to Thee, and let me not stray into the crooked path which leadeth to
destruction. And also let not my heart think about the corrupt way of the world, and all the
desire for fornication, which my parents are planning for me. O my Lord, abandon not
Thine handmaiden so that she become a sinner, and permit me not to devote myself to, and
to shoulder the heavy load of the lust of this world, but let my neck bow beneath and bear
the easy yoke of Thy commandments.” And after she had finished her prayer, she sat
down on her bed, and waited a little, and a thought came into her mind which said, “I will
arise and flee secretly, and I will go far away, and enter the innermost part of a certain
desert, and will devote my life to the Most High.” And when she had finished her thinking
she called the servant whom her parents had given to her to be her handmaiden, and she
commanded her to bring her some wine, intending to make her drink it; and the
handmaiden brought wine, and also brought a little food. And Sophia commanded the
handmaiden to drink of the wine, which she brought until it was finished, and she did so.
And the mind of the handmaiden being carried away by the headiness of the wine Sophia
said unto her, “Bring me thy apparel, and take mine”; and the handmaiden gave it to her.
Then Sophia commanded her to sleep until she had recovered from the headiness of the
wine, and when she had fallen into a heavy sleep, Sophia went out secretly, and none saw
her, for her chamber was far from her parents’ part of the house. And having departed she
arrived at a certain road, and found there people who were fleeing from Diocletian because
of the Faith; and they were seeking to hide themselves in the mountains and caves. And
she answered and said unto them, “Whence come ye?” And each man told her [the name
of] his city. And she said unto them, “Whither go ye?” And they told her all that
happened because of Diocletian and because of the Faith. And she said unto them, “Is
there anyone who will bring me along this road to Diocletian?” And they said unto her,
“Yea.” And she went on a little way further, and prayed a long prayer, and she went on,
and arrived at the place where Diocletian was, and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ. And
554

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
when Diocletian heard the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, he was filled with wrath, and he
commanded his soldiers to bring her before him. When she came he said unto her,
“Worship Apollo,” and she said unto him, “How can I worship the work of man’s hand,
unclean idols?” And forthwith Diocletian was wroth, and he commanded them to beat her
with iron rods (?), and to place a large stone on her head, and to drag her over the sand
until her flesh was torn into shreds; and then he cast her into prison. On the following day
he ordered them to bring her out, and he said unto her, “Offer sacrifice to Apollo that thou
mayest not die an evil death.” And she answered and said unto him, “It may seem to be an
evil death to thee, but for me my death through thee will be life with my God.” And he
said unto her, “Is there any life left for thee after I have put thee to death?” And she
answered and said unto him, “O fool, leave me; even for thee there is resurrection. But thy
resurrection is for judgment, with thine idols.” And when he heard this he was furiously
angry, and he commanded them to beat her with rods of iron until all the bones of her body
were broken; and they did as he commanded. And he commanded them to lay her upon a
bed of iron and to light a fire under her, and they did so, and when evening fell on the land
he commanded them to cast her into prison. That night the angel of God came to her, and
touched her, and healed her. And on the following day the emperor commanded them to
bring her [to him], and she came walking upon her feet, and she felt as if she had been
washed in the bathhouse, and had come forth anointed with unguent. When Diocletian
saw her walking on her feet, he said, “Observe ye the strength of the medicine of this
Christian woman; yesterday I tortured her with fire, and to-day she is whole.” And Saint
Sophia said unto him, “I know nothing of medicine, but my God is the master of
medicines.” And straightway the emperor persuaded her to consent, and when she refused
he ordered the soldiers to cut off her head. And as they were carrying her away to cut off
her head, our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto her and promised her many things. And He
said unto her, “Whosoever shall celebrate thy commemoration, or shall give alms in thy
name, or shall write the history of thy strife, I will receive in the kingdom which is in the
heavens.” After this they cut off her head with the sword, and she received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Amon, and to Sophia.
And on this day also became [martyrs] Bifamon, and ‘Azenhas.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 05
(June 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father Abba Jacob, from the East. This holy confessor became
an ascetic, and fought the fight of God in one of the monasteries of the East, in the days of
Constantine, the son of Constantine the Great, and in the days of Julian the infidel, and in
the days of Walentos, the believer. When Walentos was killed, Wales (Valens), his
brother, reigned in his stead; now he was an Arian, and he commanded, and also closed the
churches of the True Faith, and at length the men of the True Faith entered the evil Faith.
Now this Edict came into all the country of his dominions. And by the grace of the Holy
Spirit, the heart of this holy man waxed hot, and he rose up and went to the city of
555

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Constantinople, and he found the emperor ready to set out on an expedition to fight his
enemies who had risen up against him in the region of the West. And this saint stood up
before him, and said unto him, “I ask thee to open the churches to the believers, that they
may pray for thee, and then God shall help thee against thine enemies; but if thou wilt not
do this behold God shall cast thee away, and thou shalt flee before thine enemies.” And
the emperor was wroth, and commanded the soldiers to beat him and to bind him in
prison. And the saint said unto him, “Know that thou shalt flee before thine enemies, and
thou shalt die in a blazing fire.” And the emperor delivered him over to one who was to
keep him under guard until he should return in safety, as he expected. And Saint Jacob
said unto him, “If thou returnest in safety, then hath not God spoken by my mouth”; when
the holy man said this they took him, and beat him, and bound him in prison, and the
emperor departed to fight against his enemies. And as he stood up with his soldiers facing
his enemies, the Son of God the Creator, Who is equal with God His Father, Whom he had
denied, and he had also helped the followers of Arius in their prayers, cast him away, and
he fled from before his enemies. And they pursued him until he came to a certain village,
which they set on fire, and his men fled, and he was left behind, and he and all those who
believed the evil Faith were burned in the fire. And all those of his soldiers who were left
turned and fled to the city of Constantinople; and they told the believers this good news,
and thus the prophecy of the holy man was fulfilled. And the believers assembled, and
brought this saint out of prison with great honor, and both the believers and the unbelievers
knew that the divine grace and the spirit of prophecy dwelt on this saint. And many of the
Arians turned to the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and they bowed down at the feet of the
saint, and they confessed that the Son of God is equal with the Father in His Godhead.
And after this the holy father lived as he had done before in devotion to the ascetic life, and
in fighting the spiritual fight; and he died in peace and received the crown of everlasting
life. Salutation to Jacob from the East.
And on this day Abba ‘Ebsoy, the fighter, became a martyr. This chosen man and fighter
had Christian parents, and they served our Lord Christ, and kept His commandments; the
name of his father, who was from Antioch, and was governor of Kaw in Upper Egypt, was
“Tagestas,” and the name of his mother was “Karisa.” They lived for sixteen years, having
no son, and they were very sad because of this. One night a shining man appeared unto
Tagestas, and said unto him, “Peace be unto thee, O lover of God, behold thy prayer hath
been heard by God. And behold thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name
‘’Ebsoy.’ And he shall be a chosen vessel of God, and shall be a witness (i.e. martyr) of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and he shall be a great martyr, and shall suffer much torture, and
shall receive the crown of life”; and Tagestas told his wife what he had seen. And after a
few days, she conceived, and bore a son on the fourth day of the month of Miyazya, and
she brought him up in the knowledge, and wisdom, and the fear of God. When he was six
years old his parents sent him away to the country of ‘Akmim and they gave him to a
certain teacher, an elder, whose name was Joseph; and he dwelt there and, with his brother
Peter, devoted himself to fasting and prayer, and he performed signs and wonders. When
he was sixteen years old, the governor of Upper Egypt came to the city of Kaw, and he
persecuted and killed many believers. Then certain evil men came and informed against
these saints Abba ‘Ebsoy, and Abba Peter, saying to the governor, “They are deacons who
do not submit to thy words, and they refuse to worship the gods.” And straightway the
governor commanded his soldiers to bring them and set them [before him], and he
questioned them about all their affairs; and having heard their words he commanded them
to shut them up in prison. After three months, the angel of God appeared unto them and
556

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
said, “I am Gabriel, the announcer of glad tidings. God hath sent me to you to tell you that
your memorial shall endure forever. As for thee, my beloved ‘Ebsoy, a great conflict
awaiteth thee. They shall take thee to the city of Alexandria, and thence to Antioch, and
there thou shalt finish thy testimony.” After this the governor brought him out of prison,
and urged him to worship idols, and when the saint refused to do so, he ordered the
soldiers to put him upon the henbaz, and they crushed him severely; and then the
Archangel Gabriel descended and smashed the henbaz, and touched his flesh and healed
him. Then the emperor cast him into prison, where he healed many. Then the governor
commanded them to bring him out of prison and to fetter him in the hold of the ship, and
they tied iron chains about his neck, and put irons on his hands and feet, and they gave him
no bread; in this state he remained for ten days. On the following day they brought him
out, and set him before the governor, who said unto him, “Worship the gods,” and when he
refused to do so the governor ordered them to torture him. And they mounted Abba
‘Ebsoy upon the henbaz, and they crushed him until his blood flowed like water; and then
they shut him up in prison. Whilst he was there the Archangel Gabriel again appeared unto
him and said, “Be strong, ‘Ebsoy, O chosen one of God, and fear not, for I will be with
thee until thou finishest thy contest.” After this they brought him to the city of Alexandria,
to Diocletian, the governor, and he also questioned him about his case; and he commanded
the soldiers to beat him until his members fell upon the ground. And after this they boiled
pitch over the fire, and poured it into his ears and mouth, and throat (?), and the governor
commanded them also to light torches and to burn his sides therewith. And he also
commanded them to bring red-hot borers and to thrust them into his eyes, and also to pluck
out the nails of his hands and feet, and to tear out his bowels; and they did even so. And
straightway the Archangel Gabriel came and touched his limbs, and healed him. Then they
brought him before Diocletian, and he also tortured him with fire, and [boiling] pitch, and
sulfur, and vine-wood; and then the Archangel Gabriel delivered him. And the governor
also commanded them to cast him into the sea, with a large stone fastened to his neck with
an iron chain. And they rolled the stone down into the sea, and the stone, which was tied
to his neck, dragged down one-half of his body, and the half of his body, which was not
submerged, they tied to the top of a high pillar which they set up on the sea-shore; and they
left him there to suffer this torture until the sixth hour of the day. And after this the angel
of God came down and made his sides whole as before. When the emperor saw this he
marveled, and he said unto the headsman, “Make haste and cut off his head”; and
straightway he cut off his head, which he made to fall on the seashore. And he took his
body, and his head, and threw them into a skin, and his head joined to his body, and it
became as if it had never been cut off; and the skin set off by itself, no man carrying it, and
after ten days it arrived at the city of Alexandria. And when the men of the city of Boha
heard of this, they came and brought him to his house in the city of Boha, and they buried
him with Peter his brother. Salutation to Abba ‘Ebsoy of the city of Boha.
And on this day also Saint Bifamon became a martyr. This holy man was the son of the
brother of the father of John of Harakli, and he helped him and ministered unto him whilst
he was in prison. When John finished his martyrdom, he prepared him for burial, and he
wept over his dead body, saying, “Why hath he left me alone, a stranger to the grace of
God?” And a voice went forth from the body of John, saying, “O my beloved Bifamon, if
thou wishest to depart with me, go quickly to the governor, and confess Christ, and tomorrow morning thou wilt come to me.” And Bifamon ran and reviled Arianus, and
cursed his gods, and after the governor had tortured him severely, he cut off his head with
the sword, and Bifamon received the crown of martyrdom.
557

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also Saint Mercurius, and Feg (Aflagius), and Eblag (‘Ablawig), and
Isaac, and Ablarius, became martyrs. And on this day also Saint Mark became a martyr for
Christ’s Name, by drowning.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 06
(June 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Theodore the monk of the city of Alexandria, became a martyr. This saint was
a believer and a pure man, and he devoted himself to the ascetic life, and fought the divine
fight, and he dwelt in one of the monasteries of the city of Alexandria. Now Constantine
sent to the city of Alexandria an archbishop whose name was Gaigyos (Gargius), and who
was an Arian, and he sent with him many soldiers. And they drove from his throne the
Apostolic Saint Abba Athanasius, and Constantine made that infidel, Gargius, Archbishop
of the city of Alexandria. And after [this] there was great strife between the men of the
city and the soldiers of the emperor, and the soldiers killed many of the men of the city of
Alexandria. And after Gargius, the infidel, was seated upon the throne of Mark, the
evangelist, on which he was not fit to sit, certain men informed him about Saint Abba
Theodore, and told him that he had disputed with the Arians, and vanquished them, and put
them to shame, and made them to see clearly their infidelity. And the archbishop
commanded [the soldiers] to seize Theodore and torture him; and they did as he had
commanded them, but nothing came from him. After this that infidel, who it is not right to
call “archbishop,” commanded them to bind the hands and the feet of this saint, and to tie
him to the legs of fiery and unbridled horses which should gallop and drag him about in the
open country. And having done this to him, all the limbs of Theodore were smashed, and
his head was cut to pieces, and he delivered up his soul into the hand of the Living God,
for whose sake he had become a martyr. And he received three crowns; the first for the
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein he became a participator with all the believers; the
second for his fight in the monastic life, and the good piety which he perfected; and the
third for his martyrdom, and the hacking off of his members for the True Faith. And after
this the believers collected the members of the saint, and laid them in a coffin with great
honor. And they celebrated a festival as it might be this day, and they composed an
encomium at the time of prayer in the Romayest language, as for all the saints, and they
wrote it in the Book of Prayers. Salutation to Theodore the monk.
And on this day also they commemorate four martyrs of Mareotis, ad forty other martyrs,
and Gebre Christos, the monk.
And on this day also became martyrs the four great officers of the city of ‘Ensena, that is to
say, Eusaphius, and Taman, and Harwag, and Bacchus; they were the pillars and lawyers
of the city, and they gave alms in abundance to the poor and needy. When Arianus the
governor returned a second time to the city, these saints met him, and cried out before him,
saying, “We [say] boldly that we are Christians, and believers on our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Word of God, the First, on Whom stand the heavens and the earth.” When Arianus heard
558

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
[this] he tortured them with divers tortures, and when he was tired of torturing them, he cut
off their heads with the sword, and they finished their martyrdom. Salutation to the four
nobles of ‘Esna, who fed themselves with hunger, and watered themselves with thirst.
And on this day also died the holy father Eumenius, the seventh Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. In the days of this saint the holy woman Sophia, and her three daughters,
became martyrs. And he protected his flock well, and pleased God, and he sat for thirteen
years and died in peace.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 07
(June 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became a martyr the holy and honorable victor, Abba ‘Abaskiron from the city
of Kalen. This saint was one of the soldiers of Arianus, the governor of Antinoe. And
when the Edict of the wicked Emperor Diocletian concerning the worship of idols arrived,
this saint rose up among the people, and cursed the emperor and his gods, and no man
dared to punish him because he was a soldier, but they shut him up in the governor’s
house. And when the governor of the city of Antinoe went to the city of Asyut, the
emperor sent this saint and five other soldiers to him; and the names of these soldiers
were: Walfius, and Herminius, and Arkias, and Peter, and Carnius. These men made a
covenant with Abba ‘Abaskiron to shed their blood for the sake of the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And having stood up before the governor of Antinoe, he commanded the
soldiers to cut off the belts of these men, and then to torture them; and the soldiers did as
he commanded. Of these five soldiers some of them had their heads cut off, and some of
them were crucified, and they were crowned and received the crown of martyrdom. And
the governor commanded the soldiers to beat Saint ‘Abaskiron severely, and after this to
flay his head down to his neck; and they did so. Then he tied him to the tail of a horse, and
dragged him about the city; then he set him in a cauldron of [boiling] lead, and shut down
the cover on him; and after this he put him in the furnace of the public baths; but under all
these tortures the angel of God came to him, and helped him and comforted him, and made
him to endure patiently, and raised him up whole and uninjured. When the governor was
tired of torturing him he brought to him a certain sorcerer whose name was Alexander, and
who thought that he could cast spells on the sun and moon, and that he could ascend in the
air and hold converse with the stars. And he commanded them to shut the doors of the
baths, and to sprinkle the whole building with urine; and they did as he commanded. Then
he took a serpent, and uttered words over it, and slit it into two parts. And he took the
venom and the liver of the snake, and laid them in a brass bowl, and boiled them, and then
took them to Saint Abba ‘Abaskiron; and he brought the vessel into the bath house and
gave the saint that boiling poison, and he swallowed it. And the magician cried out,
saying, “O master of the powers of darkness, work with thy strength upon this Christian”;
and when nothing evil whatsoever happened to the saint, he marveled exceedingly. And
Saint Abba ‘Abaskiron said unto the sorcerer, “Satan, on whom thou reliest for help, will
not help thee, and he himself shall punish thee by the might of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
559

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And straightway an evil Satan leaped upon the magician, and he began to make him roll
about until he confessed our Lord Jesus Christ. And the governor commanded the soldiers
to cut off the head of the magician with the sword, and they did so, and he received the
crown of martyrdom. And the wrath of the governor against the holy man was increased,
and he had him tortured severely, and they mutilated him cruelly; and whilst the saint was
suffering this horrible torture, he gave thanks to God. After this the governor commanded
them to cut off the head of Abba ‘Abaskiron with the sword, and he received the perfect
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Abba ‘Abaskiron. [Here
is] one of the miracles of this Saint Abba ‘Abaskiron. There was a church in a certain
village in the north of Egypt, and the priests of that church were committing evil deeds;
and the saint waited for them to turn from their wickedness, but they neither repented of it
nor turned from it. And the saint entreated God, Who brought upon them the disease of the
plague, and they all died at once. And the saint departed, riding upon a horse, and he
arrived at a city the name of which was Beyahu, in Upper Egypt, at the time when men
sleep, and when the men of the city were talking together by the light of the moon before
they went to sleep. And the saint came to them, riding upon a horse, and he said unto
them, “Peace be unto you”; and as soon as they saw him they rose up straightway, and they
welcomed him, and they said unto him, “Peace be to thee, O our lord.” and he said unto
them, “I wish ye to give me a little piece of ground,” and making a line on the earth with
his spear he said, “This will be enough for me.” And the men answered and said unto him,
“Yea, our lord, as thou commandest us so shall it be”; and he gave them one hundred
dinars in gold, and disappeared from them forthwith, and they marveled at the appearance
of him, and at his words. And after these men had gone to sleep in their houses, he
transported the church from Lower Egypt to the city of Beyahu in Upper Egypt; and when
the men of the city rose up in the morning they found the church standing there; and they
marveled greatly, and glorified God. And many miracles have been worked therein from
that day to this.
And on this day one thousand six hundred men suffered martyrdom under Herminius (or,
Arminius), the governor. Salutation to the sixteen hundred martyrs of Herminius. [In the
Bodleian MS. the number is 18,000.]
And on this day also was re-opened the church of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer,
in the market place of Wela, in the city of Mesr (Cairo), after it had been closed for three years and
six months. This took place in the year one thousand and twenty of the [Era of the] Righteous
Martyrs (A.D. 1304). Salutation to the opening of the church, O Virgin Mary.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 08
(June 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is commemorated the consecration of the church of our Lady Mary, the holy
Virgin, the God-bearer, which is known as the “Bath” because of the blessed fountain of
water which our Lord Jesus Christ made to spring up, when He was there with His mother,
the Virgin Mary, at the time of their return from the country of Egypt. When the angel of
560

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
God appeared unto the righteous man Joseph, in a dream, saying, “Arise, take the Child
and His mother and depart to the land of Egypt,” Joseph rose up, and took our holy Lady,
the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, and her Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and Salome, the
daughter of the sister of our Lady, and they came to the country of Egypt, and to Debra
Kuskuam, and to the “Two Places.” And when they had lived in Egypt for three years and
six months, and Herod was dead, the angel of God appeared to Joseph and commanded
him to return to Jerusalem. When they were returning, they came to the city of Maharka,
and thence to Mesr (Cairo), and thence to Matarya, and thence to the city of the “Bath”.
And our Lord Jesus Christ made this fountain of water to spring up when He was with His
mother, the Virgin Mary, and it existeth to this day. And all men, of every country and of
every race, come there, and they intercede with our Lady the holy Virgin Mary, the Godbearer, and they receive a blessing from her, and from the blessed fountain of water.
Salutation to the consecration of the Church of Mary, which is built near the fountain made
to spring up by thy Son.
And on this day also ten hundred and two people were martyred. And on this day the
festival of Abba ‘Atkaron, and Eulogius is celebrated. [Wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also are commemorated the saints Tamada and her sons, and Herminius
(Armenius) and his mother. Salutation to Tamada and her sons, and to Herminius
(Armenius) and his mother.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 09
(June 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great prophet Samuel. The name of the father of this saint was
“Elkanah,” of the tribe of Levi, and of the family of Aaron the priest, and the name of his
mother was Hanna, and she was barren. And because of her prayer and entreaty to God at
all times, God gave her this prophet, and she brought him up in her house for three years.
Then she took him to the Temple of God, according as she had vowed before she
conceived him, and he ministered unto Eli the priest until he reached man’s estate. And
the sons of Eli made corrupt their service, and they forced the children of Israel in respect
of their offerings. And God sent a message by the prophet to Eli, and said unto him,
“Behold, I abominate thy sons, and all thy seed, [and will remove them] from the
priesthood, and I will raise up a faithful high priest who shall do My good pleasure all the
days of his life.” And God raised up this great prophet Samuel. When Eli had become old,
God called Samuel one night when he was lying down, and Samuel thought that it was Eli
who called him, because at that time he had not known a vision from God. And Samuel
rose up, and came to Eli the priest, and he said unto him, “My lord, didst thou call me?”
And Eli said unto him, “Nay. Go, lie down.” When Samuel went and lay down God
called him a second time, and a third time, and he went to Eli though God called him. And
Eli said unto Samuel, “Go, lie down, and if He calleth thee again say unto Him, ‘Speak
Lord, for Thy servant heareth.’” And when Samuel went [and lay down], and the voice
561

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
from God called him, saying, “Samuel, Samuel,” he said unto Him, “Speak my Lord; Thy
servant heareth Thy voice.” And God spoke to him the same words, which He had spoken
to Eli the priest, concerning the evil, which his sons had done, and what He wished to do to
the sons of Eli and the children of Israel. After this God commanded the prophet to anoint
Saul, the son of Kish, king over the children of Israel. When Saul transgressed the
commandment of God, He commanded this prophet to anoint David, the son of Jesse,
[over Israel]. And Samuel judged Israel for forty years and died in peace, and they
celebrate his festival on the twenty-sixth day of the month of Sane, which is the day
whereon God called Samuel, and commanded him to act. And this prophet prophesied ten
hundred and thirty-five years before the Incarnation of our Lord. Salutation to Samuel
who grew up in the Temple of God.
And on this day Lucianus and four others became martyrs. This saint was formerly a priest
of idols. When he saw the tribulation of the martyrs, whom they burned in the fire, and
beat with whips, and hacked in pieces with hatchets, and when he saw that many martyrs
whom the Emperor Aurelian cast into a red-hot fiery furnace were in no wise injured by
the fire, and that they walked about in the furnace, glorifying God, even as did the Three
Children in the furnace of Babylon, this saint marveled. Then he knew that the things
which he worshipped were idols, and he was unable to serve them any longer, and he cast
them into the fire and burnt them; and he knew that the God Who had wrought this miracle
was God indeed. And straightway he cried out boldly before the emperor, saying, “I am a
Christian”; and they brought him before the emperor, who rebuked him for abandoning his
gods the idols, and promised him many gifts if he would return to the service of the idols.
But the saint would not accept his promises, and would not listen to his command, and he
was not afraid of his torture. And the emperor tortured him severely, and hung him up
head downwards, and smashed his jaw with stones, and beat him very cruelly; after this he
cast him into prison, where he remained for many days. After this the emperor had him
brought before him with four other [Christians] who were imprisoned with him; and he
said unto them, “Offer incense to the gods. If ye will not do so, I will torture you
severely”; but they would not obey his evil commandments. And the emperor was wroth
with them, and cast them into a red-hot furnace, but God caused much rain to fall from
heaven, and it quenched the fire. And the emperor commanded the soldiers to hang him
upon a wooden cross, saying that his God was hung upon a cross, and they hung him upon
a wooden cross and drove long nails through all his body, and he delivered up his soul into
the hand of God. As for the four men, the soldiers cut off their heads and they received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Lucianus and to his four
companions in martyrdom.
And on this day also are commemorated John, the bishop, and ‘Arkola, the bishop.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

562

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Senne 10
(June 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became martyrs the holy virgins Dabamon, and Bastamon, and Sophia their
mother. Now they wanted to appoint bishop a certain man, whose name was Warsenof,
but he fled to the city of Gehmun, in the neighborhood of Bana, and he dwelt with those
holy women. That night the angel of God appeared unto him and said, “Why sleepest
thou? Thou must fight, and the crown is prepared. Rise up and go to the governor, and
confess the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ before him, and received the crown of
martyrdom.” When he awoke from his sleep he made known to the holy women what he
had seen; and they all agreed that they would take the crown of martyrdom. And they rose
up straightway and departed, and came to the governor, and confessed our Lord Jesus
Christ before him, and he tortured them severely and cast them into prison. After this he
took them with him from Balbal to the city of Senhue, and their mother followed them.
And the governor said unto them, “Cast incense to the gods,” and when they refused he
tortured them; and God sent His angel to them, and he gave them strength under the torture
[and healed] their wounds. After this he took them to the city of Dha. And the priests of
the idols told the governor that the mother of the women, and Dabamon, had cursed the
gods. Now Dabamon was a beautiful woman, and her charities were many, and she prayed
to God without ceasing. And there was a certain woman whose name was Yona, and she
and Dabamon together used to weave beautiful apparel of every kind, [and sell them, and
live on their price,] and what was left they gave away in alms. When the governor heard
the story of Sophia he sent an executioner, whose name was ‘Eulogi, to her to cut off her
head. And when he came to her, and saw the beauty of her face and of her appearance,
which was like unto that of an angel, the grace of God made him to understand that he was
not to kill her, but to take her to the governor; and she embraced the people of her house,
and went forth from the city of Denfa. When she arrived at the city of Dha, she met Saint
Warsenof and his companions, and they saluted each other. And the executioner ‘Eulogi
confessed our Lord Jesus Christ, and became a martyr, and they cut off his head with the
sword; and these holy women also confessed our Lord Jesus Christ, and became martyrs.
And Saint Bastamon they hung upon the wheel, and tortured her severely, and she
remained under torture for many days; but God gave her strength, and enabled her to
endure, and healed her wounds. Then the governor cast her into prison, where she
remained a few days, and he brought her out from prison and said unto her, “Cast incense
to the gods.” When she refused to obey his command he ordered [the soldiers] to cut off
her head, and they took her outside the city to do so; and all the women who were about
her were weeping, but she was rejoicing and was glad. And thy cut off her head with the
sword, and the heads of her mother and sister, and they received crowns of martyrdom in
the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Sophia and to her daughters Dabamon and
Bastamon.
And on this day also are commemorated ‘Aklemos the martyr, and Abba Na’on, and
Yawsek.
And on this day also is commemorated the great joy which came into all the ends of the
world, and the heavenly angels also rejoiced, for on this day went forth the Edict of the
Emperor Constantine, the believer, and just man, to all the cities and countries of his
563

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
empire, commanding the houses of idols to be closed, and the churches to be opened. And
this Edict, which was full of joy, came to the city of Alexandria as it were this day, and
they dispatched this Edict to all the countries of Egypt, and the believers rejoiced at the
exaltation of the Christians and the glorious Law of the Life-giving Cross. And they
closed the houses of idols, and they opened the churches, and they celebrated a festival as
it were this day. And this took place in the eleventh year of the reign of Constantine, and
in the first year of office of Abba Alexander, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria.
Salutation to the day of the Edict of Constantine, which opened the churches, and closed
the houses of idols.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 11
(June 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Claudius, the martyr, a man with the appearance of the angels, a
kinsman of kings, and a victor in battle. This saint fought a good fight, and received an
incorruptible crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. He rejected the glory of
this fleeting world, and inherited that which is everlasting and unending, and the heavenly
grace. The father of this saint was the brother of Numerianus, Emperor of Rome, and his
name was ‘Abtelmawos (Ptolemy), and the appearance of this saint was very goodly, like
that of Joseph, the son of Jacob-Israel. And he was mighty in battle, and he was applauded
more than any other young man in Antioch; and he was beloved by everyone because of
his strength and goodliness. And because the people of Antioch lived him so greatly they
painted a picture of him on the doors of the city, and they painted also pictures of his
enemies fleeing vanquished before him. And the saint read many of the Books of the
Church. And the Emperor of Rome heard the report of him, and he wrote to his father, and
asked for him, and his father sent him to him. When he arrived there the Emperor of Rome
went out to meet him with his soldiers, and he and all the men of the city rejoiced in him.
And in those days a great war broke out with the men of Kuez (Khuzistan) and the men of
Armenia, and Saint Clauidius marched against them, and conquered them, and he seized
their king and broke them. After this he returned to the city of Antioch, and he found that
the Emperor Diocletian had denied our Lord Jesus Christ, and was worshipping idols. And
Claudius had a friend whose name was Victor, and he was the son of Hermanus, and they
were reciting at all times words of the Holy Scripture, which were beneficial for the
salvation of their souls; and they agreed together to shed their blood for the sake of the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Satan appeared unto them in the form of an old man,
who pretended to be suffering grief, saying, “O my sons, ye goodly young men, the sons of
emperors, I am afraid on your account, and I sorrow for you, I advise you to make friends
with this infidel emperor, and to cast incense to his gods and idols; when he commandeth
you to do this, do not transgress his command, but serve ye Christ in your houses, for this
emperor is strong, and mighty, and merciless.” And our Lord Jesus Christ made them to
understand that he who was speaking to them was Satan, and the saints, said unto him, “O
thou who art filled with all manner of evil, and who art the father of lies, get thee gone
from us, for thou dost always oppose the path of God.” And straightway the old man
564

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
changed his appearance, and became like a black man, and he said unto them, “Behold, I
will [go] before you to the emperor and make him to shed your blood.” And Satan went to
Diocletian, and said unto him, “If thou dost not kill Victor and Claudius they will rise up
against thee, and kill thee, and take thy kingdom.” Therefore did the emperor send to Saint
Claudius, and call him, and he came to him; and the emperor asked him to cast incense to
his idols, and promised to give him his father’s office, but Claudius neither accepted his
promise, nor submitted to his order. Now the emperor did not dare to speak to (i.e.
threaten) Claudius in the city of Antioch, for Saint Claudius spake to him boldly and
fearlessly and reviled him. And Romanus advised Diocletian to send Saint Claudius to the
country of Egypt, and to kill him there, [saying,] “He is a heretic like my son Victor.” And
the emperor wrote a letter to the governor of Antinoe, saying, “Claudius will accept
[nothing] from us, and he will neither hearken to our words nor obey them. Do thou
persuade him with all thy power to return to his allegiance to us, and if he will not do so
cut off his head with the sword.” When Saint Claudius heard that the emperor had ordered
them to send him to Egypt, he commanded Sidrakos, his sister’s husband, [concerning
her,] and committed her to his care, and he embraced him, and departed to the country of
Egypt, together with the emperor’s envoys. When he arrived in the presence of Arianus,
the governor of Antinoe, and the governor saw him, he rose up and kissed his hand, and he
entreated him, saying, “O my lord Claudius, do not this thing, and do not transgress the
emperor’s command.” And they held converse together in this wise until Arianus became
furious and filled with wrath, and he drove the spear which he had in his hand into the
saint, who delivered up his spirit straightway, and received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. And certain believers came and took the body of Saint Claudius,
and swathed it with costly cloths, and laid it with the body of Saint Victor; and the bodies
remained thus until the end of the days of persecution. And the mother of Saint Victor
came to the city of Antinoe, and she made the bodies ready for burial. And she carried
them to the city of Antioch. They say, however, that the body of Saint Claudius resteth
now in the city of Asyut. Salutation to Claudius. Salutation to the one and twenty and to
the six and sixty members of the palace of Claudius who suffered martyrdom through him.
And on this day also is commemorated the consecration of the church of the Forty soldiermartyrs in the church of our Redeemer Jesus Christ, in the city of Alexandria, and
Kirubaweyanu, the archbishop. Salutation to the consecration of Thy Church, O Jesus the
Redeemer.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 12
(June 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the commemoration of the glorious angel Michael the Archangel.
Now the reason for the celebration of the festival is as follows: There was in the city of
Alexandria a great temple which Queen Cleopatra, the daughter of Ptolemy, King of
Egypt, had built in the name of the star Zuhal (Venus), and they celebrated a festival in its
honor on the twelfth day of the month of Sane. And there was in that temple a great brass
565

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
idol which was exceedingly awesome, and its name was Zuhal (Venus), and they used to
offer up many sacrifices to it on the day of the festival; and they continued to celebrate the
festival of that idol until the days of the archiepiscopate of Archbishop Alexander, that is
to say for three hundred years and more. When Abba Alexander was appointed
Archbishop of Alexandria, the righteous Emperor Constantine was reigning, and the True
Christian Faith spread abroad. And Abba Alexander wanted to smash that idol, but some
worthless men of the city prevented him, and they said unto him, “We are in the habit of
celebrating a festival in honor of this idol. And behold, fifteen archbishops have preceded
thee [here], and they did not alter our custom.” And Abba Alexander rebuked them
severely, and he explained the matter to them, and said, “This idol can do neither evil nor
good, but those who celebrate the festivals of idols worship Satans.” And Abba Alexander
also said unto them, “If ye will hearken unto my advice, let me arrange for you this festival
as it ought to have been in olden times, that is to say, let us smash this idol, and
[re]consecrate the temple, and turn it into a church in the name of the glorious angel
Michael, the Archangel, and we will arrange this festival in his honor. And let the altar be
[re-dedicated] to God Most High, and let the poor, and the needy, and the wretched, eat the
oxen and sheep which the priests slay, and the glorious angel Michael shall intercede on
your behalf with our Lord Jesus Christ.” And this good counsel pleased them, and they
yielded to his wishes, and they made the temple a church in the name of the glorious angel
Michael the Archangel. And that temple became known as the “Church of Caesarea,” and
it continued to stand until the Muslims reigned in Egypt, and then they destroyed it. And
this festival was established by order, and all the people of the districts [in Egypt]
celebrated it in honor of the glorious angel Michael the Archangel to his grade, above all
the angels, and to his greatness, and the archangel performed many miracles among which
is the following: There was a certain man who feared God, and who used to celebrate the
commemoration of the glorious angel Michael on the twelfth day of each month, and
especially during the months of Hedar and Sane. And there was among his neighbors a
rich man who was without mercy, and he used to hate that God-fearing man when he
celebrated the festival of the glorious angel, and to laugh at him. When the days of the
God-fearing man had come to an end, and the time of his death, when he would rest from
the labor of this fleeting world, drew nigh, he commanded his wife to be merciful, and to
celebrate the commemoration of that glorious angel Michael, and especially the festivals
which fell on the twelfth day of Hedar and on the twelfth day of Sane. Now at the time of
the death of the God-fearing man, his wife was with child. And after the man died his wife
buried him. And at that time the woman was near her time to bring forth, and the pains of
childbirth seized her, and she was in very great tribulation, and she said, “O Michael, angel
of God, have compassion upon me, and entreat God on my behalf so that He may deliver
me from the tribulation in which I am, and which hath come upon me this day; for with
thee there is great grace with God.” And when she had said these words, the house
wherein she was became full of light, and forthwith she was relieved of her pains, and she
brought forth a child whose appearance was godly. And the angel of God, the glorious
Michael, came down from heaven, and he blessed the child, and said, “Thus saith God:
This child shall inherit the goods of the rich man who hath no mercy, and all his
possessions and all his lands.” At that moment the rich man was looking out from the
window of his house upon the house of the woman, and he heard the voice of Michael, the
angel of God, saying, “This child shall inherit the money of the rich man.” Then great
sorrow came upon him, and he sought for a pretext for killing the child, but God protected
him through the intercession of the glorious angel Michael. And when the days of the
566

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
child were ten years, his mother’s money came to an end, and the rich man, with small
mercy in him, found his opportunity against the woman. And he said unto her, “Give me
thy son, and let him minister unto me, and I will feed him and clothe him, and will give
thee twenty dinars in gold.” When the woman heard these words from the rich man she
rejoiced on account of her poverty, and the rich man gave her twenty dinars in gold, and
she gave him her son; and having taken him the rich man rejoiced with a great joy, and he
said in his heart, “Behold what I have desired is fulfilled for me.” Then he made a wooden
box as long as the boy was tall, and he forced the boy into the box, and fastened the cover
over him, and he carried the box to the river, and cast it into the water, and he also cast the
key of the box into the river. And by the Will of God the box floated on the surface of the
river until it came to the quay of a certain city, which was not far from the river. And there
was a certain shepherd who was watching and tending his flocks near the river, and when
he saw the box in the river, he dragged it out, and carried it into his house, and he was
thinking by what means he would open the box. And as he was thinking about this matter,
God put the thought into his heart that he should go to the river, and straightway he went
and found a man catching fish. And the shepherd said unto him, “Cast [thy] net into the
river in my name, and I will give thee the price of the fish which shall be caught”; and the
fisherman did as the shepherd told him. And a great fish came out from the net, and the
shepherd gave him the price thereof; and taking it he went to his house, and he killed the
fish to broil it, that he and his household might eat. And having slit open the belly of the
fish he found a key inside it, and he said within himself, “Perhaps this is the key of the
box.” And having inserted the key into the keyhole of the box, the box opened quickly,
and the shepherd marveled for he found inside it the boy whom the rich man wanted to
kill. When he saw [the boy] he rejoiced in him with a great joy, and he called him
“Bahran” because he found him in the river; and the boy became to him as his son. Now
the distance of the city wherein the boy was born, from that wherein the shepherd lived,
was a journey of ten days. And after many days the rich man in whom there was no mercy
wished to go and sojourn with the shepherd, and when the sun was about to set he said
unto the shepherd, “Peradventure thou hast a place wherein we can lodge until to-morrow;
if thou hast I will pay thee thy charge.” And the shepherd brought the rich man into his
house, and he called the young man by his name of “Bahran.” When the rich man heard
this name he asked the shepherd, saying, “Is this thy son?” And the shepherd said unto
him, “Yea, I found this young man when he was a little boy in a box in the river, and I took
him and reared him as my son.” When the rich man, in whom there was no mercy, heard
this he was very sorry in his heart, and he knew that the young man was the boy whom he
had thrown into the river to kill him. And on the morrow the rich man wished to depart,
and he devised a device of Satan and said unto the shepherd, “I want thee to give me this
thy son so that I may send him with a message to my house in the city which is called Soand-so, because I have forgotten something which is in my house; and the payment of
twenty dinars of gold which I should give to him I will give to thee.” And the shepherd
rejoiced because of the gold, and he called the young man and said unto him, “O my son
Bahran, come that this honorable man may send thee to his house on some business
concerning his house, and return to my house in peace”; and the young man said unto him,
“Willingly, O my father, whatsoever thou commandest me I will do.” Then straightway
the rich man wrote a letter to his steward, saying, “When thou hast read this letter kill the
bearer of it, whose name is ‘Bahran,’ and cast his body into a pit. Let no one know about
this until I come in peace”; and he wrote on the letter a certain sign which they had agreed
upon, and which none but they two knew. And he sealed the letter and gave it to Bahran,
567

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and he gave him what money was needful for the journey, and the young man departed.
And as he was journeying along the road, he was about half-way between the two cities,
behold one day the angel of God, Michael, the Archangel, came to him, riding upon a
horse in the form of a soldier of the emperor; and he said unto Bahran, “What hast thou
with thee?” And he said unto him, “I have with me a letter from a rich man who hath sent
me to his house in such and such a city.” And the angel of God, the glorious Michael, said
unto him, “Show me the letter,” and Bahran being afraid of him gave him the letter. And
the angel blew on the paper, and obliterated everything, which was written upon it. And
the glorious angel, Michael, the Archangel, wrote with his own hand on the paper, saying,
“Behold, I the rich man So-and-so have sent unto thee the bearer of this letter whose name
is Bahran. As soon as ye have read this letter marry my daughter So-and-so to him, I have
given him all the goods in my house, and all my lands. Do not wait until I come back, for I
shall tarry on my journey. Let him do what he wisheth in my house, for I have given him
authority over all my goods and over my house. Here is the sign which is between thee
and me, O my steward, So-and-so.” And the angel of God, the holy angel Michael, the
Archangel, sealed the letter, and gave it to Bahran, and said unto him, “Go to the house of
the rich man, and when thou hast arrived at his house give this letter to his steward, and do
not tell him that I met thee on the road, and that I have changed [the contents of] this
letter.” And Bahran said unto him, “Yea, my lord, everything which thou hast commanded
me I will do.” And Bahran went on until he arrived at that city, and he enquired for the
house of the rich man So-and-so, and one brought him to it, and he gave his letter to his
steward. And when the steward had read it, and understood the contents thereof, he
recognized the [private] mark, and knew that it was authentic. And forthwith they made a
great marriage-feast for Bahran and the daughter of the rich man, and they married them in
the church, before the sanctuary of God; and they lived in the happiness of marriage for
forty days. And towards the end of the marriage-feast the rich man returned to his city,
and when he heard the sound of the music and singing, and the rejoicings, he asked,
saying, “What is this sound which I hear?” And certain of the men said unto him, “Thy
letter came by the hand of a young man called Bahran, and as in it thou didst command
that thy daughter should be married to him, they gave her to that young man whose name
is Bahran. And behold they have been rejoicing in the marriage-feast forty days and forty
nights. And they have given him all thy money, and thy house, and menservants and
handmaidens, and all thy possessions, according to what thou didst command in thy
letter.” And when the rich man heard these words, he cried out at the top of his voice, and
fell down and died; and straightway the Satans took his soul into the lowest Hades. And
the young man inherited all his money even as God the Most High had commanded. And
the young man Bahran celebrated the commemoration of the glorious angel of God,
Michael the Archangel, on the twelfth day of each month, and he knew that it was he who
had appeared unto him and breathed on the letter and obliterated what was written therein,
and had written other matter in its place. And after this he built a beautiful church in the
name of the glorious angel Michael, the Archangel, and he painted a picture of him in it in
front of the sanctuary, and through this picture many signs and wonders were made
manifest, and the sick were healed. And Bahran was appointed priest of that church, and
he ministered therein until the day of his death, and his mother and his son inherited
everlasting life through the intercession of the glorious and holy angel, Saint Michael, the
Archangel. And on the day of the resurrection this glorious angel bowed before the throne
of God, and said, “I beg and entreat Thy compassion, O my God, I Thy servant and
messenger, to make known to me all those who celebrate my commemoration upon earth,
568

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
through Thy righteous promise, for Thou art merciful and compassionate.” And God
answered and said unto him, “O Michael, chief of the faithful hosts of heaven, behold, I
command thee to lift up upon thy wing of fire as many [men] as thou art able to carry upon
it, three times.” And when Saint Michael heard this he rejoiced and was glad, and he lifted
up upon his wing three times [as many as he could of] the men who celebrated his
commemoration upon earth and made them to pass by the river of fire. And there were
thousands of thousands and tens of thousands of tens of thousands, and no one could
number them except God Himself. Therefore, O beloved, it is meet that we should strive,
and should celebrate the commemoration of the glorious angel Michael, the Archangel, as
well as we are able, even if it be only to give a cup of cold water in his name, even as our
Lord saith in His Holy Gospel. And let us ask for mercy from God through the
intercession of the glorious angel Michael, that He may deliver us from the net of Satan,
the accursed, and may put far away from us all pain (or, sickness) and the plague, and may
increase the fruits of our lands in performing His mercy, and may forgive us our sins, and
may give rest to the souls of our dead, and may bring back in safety those of our fathers
and brethren who are on a journey, and may set peace in our midst, and may strengthen us
in the True Faith to our last breath. And this glorious angel Saint Michael the Archangel
performed many miracles. Salutation to Michael.
And on this day also is commemorated the death and history of Saint Euphemia. This
holy woman was the wife of a man who feared God, and he gave much alms, and kept
three festivals each month, that is to say, the festival of the glorious Saint Michael, on the
twelfth day of each month, and the festival of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary on the
twenty-first day of each month, and the festival commemorating the birth of our Lord and
Redeemer Jesus Christ on the twenty-ninth day of each month. And when the day of his
death drew nigh, he commanded the saint, his wife, never to fail in giving alms as he was
wont to do, and especially to keep these three festivals. And she asked her husband to
have painted a picture of the glorious angel Saint Michael, the Archangel, in her house, and
to give it to her, and he did this for her; and when he died this saint continued to do as her
husband had done. And Satan was jealous of her, and he came unto her disguised as a
widow who was a nun, and he came to her and held converse with her, saying, “I am sorry
for thee and pity thee. And now I advise you to marry, and to bring forth a son before thy
money come to an end, and thou fallest into want at the last.” And then he said unto her,
“Behold, thy husband hath inherited the kingdom of heaven, and he hath no need of alms.”
And she answered and said unto him, “I have promised God that I will never consort with
another man; even the doves and the ravens do not take second mates. How then can men
who are created in the form and likeness of God do this?” And when she would not
hearken unto his advice, he changed his form, and cried out against her, saying, “I will
come to thee another day”; and she took the picture of the glorious Saint Michael, and
drove him away therewith. And when the twelfth day of Sane had come, and she was
occupied with the celebration of the festival according to her custom, Satan appeared unto
her in the form of the glorious Saint Michael, and he said unto her, “Peace be unto thee ! I
am Michael, the Archangel, God hath sent me to thee, and He commandeth thee to cease
from these alms, and to marry a believing man. Know thou that a woman without a man is
like a ship without a rudder”; and he began to bring to her proofs out of the Old Testament,
and to show her how Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and David, and others like unto them
married wives and pleased God. And the saint answered and said unto him, “If thou art an
angel of God, where is the symbol of the Cross on thee? The soldier of a king never goeth
to another place without the symbol of the king on him.” When Satan heard these words
569

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
from her, he changed his form, and he began to choke her, and she prayed to the glorious
Saint Michael, and he came unto her forthwith and delivered her from him. And he seized
Satan and began to punish him, and Satan entreated him, saying, “God will bear with us
until the end of the world. Have mercy upon me and do not torture me”; and he gave her
the salutation of peace and went up into heaven. And after she had finished the
preparations for the feast in the proper manner, she sent to the bishop and the priests, and
they came to her, and she gave them all her money to give to the poor, and the needy, and
the destitute. And she took the picture of the glorious Saint Michael, and prayed to it, and
laid it upon her face and breast, and then she died in peace. Salutation to Euphemia who
conquered Mastema (i.e. Satan).
And on this day also died the holy father Justus, the sixth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This saint was a learned and honorable man of Alexandria, and Saint Mark,
the evangelist, baptized him, and his mother, and many others, with Christian baptism.
Then Anianus, the perfect deacon, made him a reader, and on another occasion he made
him a priest. And he grew up in the Law of the Church, and he knew all the Scriptures,
and he frequently sat with Saint Anianus; and he taught the people, and confirmed them in
the True Faith. And when Abba Barmeyu died, they took him, and against his will made
him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And he protected well the Church in all the land
of Egypt, and he ruled them rightly and as was fitting. He sat upon the throne of Mark the
evangelist for twelve years, and he died in peace, at a good old age, and pleased his God.
Salutation to Justus whom Mark baptized.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Cyril, the sixty-seventh Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. When the father Abba Gebre Christos, the archbishop who preceded
him, died, the bishops and elders of the people agreed together, and went up to the
monastery of Saint Abba Macarius, of the desert of Scete, and they passed two months
there in seeking to find out who was the most suitable man for this holy position. And
there was in the monastery of Saint Abba John Kama a certain righteous man, whose name
was Gebre Christos, who had the power of seeing the future by the Holy Ghost. And the
angel of God appeared unto him, and said unto him, “Speak to the bishops and say unto
them, ‘Trouble not, for behold there is among you in the monastery of Saint Abba
Macarius, a man who is fit for this honorable position; and his name is Ga’argi.’” And
straightway Saint Gebre Christos told them these words, and they took this father against
his will, and made him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And the Church shone
through him, and all the people of the Church in the country of Egypt rejoiced in that
appointment. And he was exceedingly learned, and he appointed bishops, and priests, and
deacons, and he restored many churches. During his period of office he appointed a
second bishop to the country of Ethiopia, whose name was Sawiros. He was the brother of
the Bishop of Ethiopia, and had been brought up in his house there [in Egypt]. And when
Abba Sawiros arrived in the country of Ethiopia the people rejoiced greatly in him because
of his knowledge and his righteousness; and he converted very many from their evil deeds
to repentance and the fear of God. And the king of Ethiopia had many wives, and his
nobles also, and through the teaching of the bishop they all gave up their companies of
wives and each man lived with one wife only. And when he had been in office for eleven
years and three and a half months, after partaking of the Holy Mysteries, he died in peace.
And they carried his body to the monastery of Abba Macarius, and laid it with the bodies
of the archbishops. Salutation to Cyril the archbishop.
570

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died the blessed and pure seer of the mysteries of heaven Lalibela
[surnamed Gebre Meskel], King of Ethiopia. The parents of this saint having begotten
him, they brought him up in the fear of God. And when he had grown up, an had arrived at
man’s estate, the king his elder brother heard that he would inherit the kingdom, and sit
upon his throne, and jealousy came upon him. And he sent and called him, and when he
came, and stood up before him, he contrived a matter against him, and he commanded his
servants to beat him, and they beat him with very many stripes, from the third hour of the
day to the ninth hour; and after this he commanded them to set him before him. And when
he stood up before him the king and all his soldiers marveled when they saw that no injury
had happened to him; now the angel of God had supported him. Then the king said unto
him, “Forgive me, O my brother, for what I have done to thee”; and then they made peace
and were reconciled to each other. And God saw the punishment, which he suffered that
day, and He made him to inherit the kingdom. And having become king he meditated on
the things, which would please God, and he made many gifts to the poor and needy. And
when God saw the strength of his live, the angel of God appeared unto him in a dream, and
he showed him how he was to build ten churches together, but each being different from
the other. And he did as God showed him, and when he had finished the building of these
churches, he made his brother’s son to inherit the kingdom. Salutation to Lalibela, the
builder of churches.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 13
(June 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father John, Bishop of Jerusalem. This saint became a monk in
his early years in the monastery of Saint Abba Hilarion the Great, with the father Abba
Epiphanius, and he devoted himself to the ascetic life and fought a great fight. And his
knowledge and his virtues were noised abroad, and [the bishops and priests] chose him,
and made him Bishop of Jerusalem, after he had been appointed Bishop of Cyprus. And
when this father had seated himself in his office, Satan led him astray through the love of
money and possessions, and he gathered together much money, and he made vessels of
silver for his table, and he used to eat out of them; and he never gave anything to the poor
and needy, not even the broken bread-cakes. And Saint Epiphanius heard the report of
him, and then he remembered his spiritual fight, and how formerly he had rejected the
world, and his devotion to God and the ascetic life, and his piety, and his mercy, and he
had pity upon him from the depth of his heart, and he remembered his affection, for he was
his brother in the Holy Spirit, and his friend of long ago. And Saint Epiphanius rose up
from Cyprus, and came to the city of Jerusalem, for the sake of this father Abba John,
(although he made it appear to men that he had come to worship in the Temple of
Jerusalem,) that he might save him from his error. And when Abba Epiphanius came to the
city of Jerusalem, this father Abba John invited him to his house, and he placed before him
a table whereon were set the beautiful vessels of silver with pottage in them. And then
Abba Epiphanius saw that Abba John had in him no mercy for the poor and needy; and he
was very sorry for him, and his heart was in pain because of him. And after he had gone
571

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
forth from him Abba Epiphanius devised the following plan: He was dwelling in one of
the monasteries of Jerusalem, and he sent to Saint Abba John, saying, “Know, O my
brother, that the elders of the city of Cyprus, and all the chiefs of the people, have come to
visit me, and I wish thee to do me honor before them, and to send to me from your house
the silver vessels of thy table that they may eat pottage from them”; and Abba John sent
the vessels to him. And Saint Abba Epiphanius took them, and sold them, and received the
price of them, and he gave away the money in alms to the poor and needy. And after a few
days Saint Abba John said unto the holy and blessed Abba Epiphanius, “Give me back the
vessels of my table which I sent unto thee”; and Epiphanius said, “Yea, I will.” And Abba
John demanded them from him a second, and a third time, and Epiphanius said unto him,
“Yea, I will.” And when he did not give them up, Abba John seized him by the hem of his
garment in the church, on [the day of] the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he
said unto him, “I will not let thee go until thou givest me back my [silver] vessels.” And
Abba Epiphanius prayed, and entreated God, and God made Abba John blind. Then Abba
John wept and entreated Epiphanius, who prayed to the Lord God our Lord Jesus Christ,
and He opened for him one of his eyes. And Epiphanius said unto him, “Behold, our Lord
Jesus Christ hath left blind one of thine eyes so that thou mayest remember thy good
spiritual fight, and thy strivings, and thy former good and willing deeds. Know thou that I
have sold the vessels of thy table, and have given the price thereof in alms to the poor and
needy on thine account. I only came to Jerusalem because I heard that thou wast a lover of
money.” And from that time Abba John awoke from his dream of inertness, even as a man
waketh up out of slumber, and he walked diligently in the path of charity, and more than
any man he gave away in alms all his money, and all the clothes which he had. And he
gave up the acquisition of money and the riches of this fleeting world, and at last, at the
time of his death, there was not found with him one dirham of gold, or any smaller piece of
money. And God gave him the great gift of healing, and he worked many miracles, and he
used to heal all those who were sick or who had diseases by anointing them with holy oil
from the Tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he protected them by means of the sign of the
Life-giving Cross. And having finished his spiritual fight and his divine excellences, and
pleased God, he died in peace. Salutation to John the Perfect, Bishop of Jerusalem.
And on this day also the Christian peoples of the land of Egypt are accustomed to celebrate
the festival of the glorious angel, the Archangel Gabriel, the captain of the host of heaven,
who preached the new tidings. In the first place it was he who brought news to Daniel,
when he was praying and entreating God for the return of the children of Israel from
captivity, and for their deliverance from Satan. And this great angel appeared unto him,
and announced to him the deliverance of the children of Israel from the captivity of
Babylon, and the building of the sanctuary in Jerusalem; and he announced to them the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he defined the number of years after the passing of
which our Lord Jesus Christ would come, and he made him to know that He would be
killed, and that afterwards the city of Jerusalem would be laid waste, and that no other
Messiah would come after Him except the False Messiah. And when the years which he
had defined were ended, and the time had come for the Redeemer to arrive, this glorious
archangel, and captain of the hosts of heaven, Saint Gabriel, came from God and
announced to our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, the coming to her of the
Son of the Living God, and His Incarnation through her. And Gabriel appeared in the flesh
because God loved him, and it was for this reason that He sent this angel on these two
great missions. And our fathers, the doctors of the holy Church, have commanded us to
celebrate a festival in his honor each year. Let us entreat him to intercede for us with out
572

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, that He may deliver us from our enemies, for he is nigh
unto Him, and he standeth before His throne, so that by his intercession we may find grace
before our God, to Whom are meet praise, and [ascription of] might, and laud, and the
heartiest thanksgiving, and honor, [on] all days. Salutation to Gabriel.
And on this day also is commemorated Cainan, who lived nine hundred and ten hundred
(sic) years; and he died on the fourth day of the week.
And on this day also are commemorated ‘Abulag, the martyr, and two hundred martyrs,
and our father Matyan, who were persecuted for righteousness’ sake.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 14
(June 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became martyrs the saints Abba ‘Akra, and John, and ‘Abtelma, and Philip.
This Saint Abba ‘Akra was of the men of the city of Damanhur, in the district of Busir, in
the north of Egypt, and west of the river of Mesr (Cairo); he had a brother, whose name
was Philip, and he was exceedingly rich. And they made an agreement with their two
priests, whose names were John and ‘Abtelma, and the four of them came to the city of
Kartes, and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor. And the governor
commanded the soldiers to shoot them to death with arrows, and they shot at them, but the
arrows never reached them. And after this the governor commanded them to cast them
into a red-hot oven, and they did so, and they heaped up the fire upon them, but God sent
His angel and delivered them from the fire. Then the governor commanded them to tie
them to the tails of horses, and to drag them from the city of Kartes to the city of
Damanhur; and they did all this to them, but no injury whatsoever came to them. And the
governor commanded them to cut off their heads, and they took them outside the city of
Damanhur, and cut off their heads with the sword, and the saints received crowns of
martyrdom. And men came from the city of Da and took the body of Saint Abba ‘Akra,
and they built for him a beautiful church, and laid his body inside it, and many signs and
wonders took place therein through him. And similarly, men of the city of Damanhur
came and took [the bodies] of the three saints Philip, and ‘Abtelma, and John, and wrapped
them for burial in costly cloths, and they built them beautiful churches, and laid their
bodies inside them, and countless very great signs and miracles took place therein.
Salutation to ‘Abtelma, and Philip, and John, and ‘Akra.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

573

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Senne 15
(June 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the consecration of the church of the blessed, and
holy, and victorious fighter, the soldier of heaven, our father Minas, in the city which is
called Maryut (Mareotis), and his miracles were made manifest, and his body revealed.
Now the body of the saint, having been hidden in the earth, the glorious and Most High
God wished to reveal it. And in those days there was a certain shepherd, who pastured his
sheep near the hill wherein the body of Saint Abba Minas was hidden and buried, and this
shepherd saw one of his sheep, which was sick of a grievous disease, dip itself in the water
of the well which was near that place, and then roll itself in the dust of the hill, and it was
healed straightway. And the shepherd marveled, and he used to take all his sick sheep, and
wash them in that water, and make them to roll themselves in the dust of that hill, and they
were healed straightway. And this also the shepherd used to do with all the sick folk
whom the people brought to him; he mixed the dust from the hill with the water and
smeared them with the mixture, and they were healed straightway; now the shepherd knew
the cause of the healing. And the report of this shepherd was heard by the Emperor of
Rome. And he had a daughter who was sick with running sores, and he sent her to the
shepherd who healed her of her sickness, in the same way as he healed his sheep. And
having been healed she wished to know the reasons why that place healed her, and Saint
Minas appeared unto her in a vision, and told her that his body was hidden in that place,
and said, “Behold, God hath commanded thee to dig, and to raise me up.” When she
awoke she did as the saint commanded, and raised up his glorious body, and she built over
it a beautiful shrine, and they laid his honorable body inside it. And the emperor
commanded his nobles and his officials to build their houses in that place, and a great city
was built and it was called Maryut (Mareotis). And God made manifest through the body
of this Saint Abba Minas countless signs and miracles. And the archbishop [of
Alexandria], and his bishops, came and consecrated the church, as it were this day. And
the fame of the signs and wonders, which appeared in that church through the intercession
and entreaty of Saint Minas, the martyr, was noised abroad [everywhere]. Salutation to the
consecration of thy house, O Saint Minas.
And on this day also is commemorated Gebre Christos, the pure deacon.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 16
(June 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died at a good old age the ascetic father and fighter, of a glorious memory,
Abba Nafer (Abunafer), who was the first ascetic [to live] in the desert of Upper Egypt.
Now the history of this saint is related unto us by Paphnutius, who was moved by the grace
of God, and was sent to see the servants of God who lived in the desert. And he saw many
574

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
of them, and wrote the history of their strives, and among these was Abba Nafer. When
this father came into the desert he found a well of water, and a palm tree, and he lived in
that desert for eight years. And one day this saint Paphnutius saw Abba Nafer coming to
him, and he was naked, and the hair of his head and his beard covered his body. When he
saw Paphnutius he was afraid of him, and he thought that he was an unclean spirit, and
Saint Abba Paphnutius held him fast, and made the sign of the Cross before him, and he
prayed and said, “Our Father which art in heaven.” Then Saint Abba Nafer said unto him,
“Good is thy coming to me, O Abba Paphnutius.” And when the saint had prayed before
him, and had called upon him to put aside fear, the two prayed together, and held converse
about the greatness of God. And Paphnutius asked Abba Nafer to tell him how and by
what means his coming to that place happened, and how he lived. And Abba Nafer
answered and said unto him, “I was living in this desert (i.e. monastery) wherein there are
righteous and chosen monks, and I heard them talking about the greatness of those who
live in the desert, and praising them for the good works of all kinds which they performed.
And I said unto them, ‘Are there here any who are better than you?’ And they said unto
me, ‘Yea, those who live in the desert are held in honor by God. We live near the world
and the men who are in it, and if we sorrow, or are sad, we find someone who will comfort
us; if we are sick, we find someone to visit us; if we are naked, we find someone to clothe
us; and if we desire any desirable object we find it; but those who live in the desert lack
everything.’ When I heard these words from them my heart burned like fire. When the
night came I took a little bread and I went out from the monastery, and I prayed and asked
the Lord Jesus Christ to guide me to the place wherein I was to live; and then I set out.
And God prepared a certain righteous man for me, and I found [him] and I dwelt with him,
until he guided me into the path of the desert monks. Then I came to this place, and I
found this palm tree, which beareth twelve clusters of dates each year; one cluster of dates
serveth as food for me each month, and I drink water from this well. And behold I have
lived in this desert until this day, eight years, and I have never seen any man’s face but
thine.” And whilst they were talking together the angel of God came down to them, and
administered unto them the Holy Mysteries, the Body and Blood of our Lord and God and
Redeemer Jesus Christ. And they ate a little food together, and then Saint Abba Nafer
transformed himself, and became like a fire, and then he bowed his knees and worshipped
God, and he embraced Saint Paphnutius, and delivered up his soul into the hand of God.
And the saint wrapped him in cloth made of sheep’s wool, and buried him in that cave.
And he thought within himself that he would live in that place instead of Abba Nafer, but
when he had buried him the palm tree fell down, and the well of water dried up, which
happened by the Will of God. And when Saint Paphnutius came back into the world, he
declared the histories of the desert saints whom he had seen, and especially the history of
this Saint Abba Nafer, and the day on which he died. Salutation to Abba Nafer.
Salutation to you, O ye who dwelt on the sand.
Salutation to thee, O Iyasus-Buruk, the faithful companion of Yekuno-’Amlak, [King of
Ethiopia, A.D. 1270-1285].
And on this day the angel of God appeared to Joseph in a dream, and told him to take the
Child and His mother, and to return to the land of Israel.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
575

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Senne 17
(June 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba Latsun. This saint was a man of the city of Behensa, and
when he was a young man he heard the Holy Gospel, which saith, “He who wisheth to
save his soul let him throw it away. And he who hath cast away his soul, shall find
everlasting life” (Matthew xvi, 25). When he heard this, his heart became hot like fire with
the love of God, and having received the Holy Mysteries he departed to the monastery of
‘Asnokhat, where he fought a great fight with ceaseless fasting and prayers; and he used to
fast for a week at a time. And the angel of God appeared unto him, and told him to go to
Saint Isidore, to be endued with the garb of the monastic life by him. And Abba Latsun
went to Saint Abba Isidore, who prayed over the apparel, which is the garb of the angels
and of the monastic life, for forty days, and endued him with the garb of the monastic life;
and Abba Latsun devoted himself to God and to the spiritual fight. Then by the advice of
his teacher he went out and dwelt by himself, and he kept vigil, and prayed, and fasted
continually. And there was near him a certain monastery, the monks of which he used to
visit, and one day when he went to the monastery he found the abbot of the monastery sick
and nigh to die; and all the monks were round about him weeping. And then Saint Abba
Latsun saw the hosts of Satan surrounding him, and he asked the abbot, saying, “What hath
happened to thee, O Father?” And the abbot commanded the monks to go forth from him,
and he began and told Abba Latsun all the sins which he had committed during his youth,
and they were very great indeed, and very many. And he said unto him, “Forgive me, O
my brother, I have done many evil things, and there is no man before me who hath done
the like, as for example: When I wanted to be made a priest, and they would not make me
one, I departed to another place, and I said that the bishop had made me a priest, and I
consecrated the Offering without fear. And I took the Holy Body and I worked magic
therewith. And I lay with the mother, who brought me forth ten times, and she conceived
by me, and when she was near her time for bringing forth I made her drink medicine so
that I might kill the child. My sin is very great indeed. And behold, the time of my death
and of my departure from this world hath arrived, and I have no good deed, which I can
offer unto God. I beseech thee, O my father, and I bow to thee before God, that thou
mayest remember me in thy holy prayers.” And Abba Latsun wept, and he saw the Satans
taking the soul of that man, and they tortured it with beatings with whips of fire; and it
became black. And after he had made the body of the abbot ready for burial, and had
buried him, Saint Latsun remembered the words of that wretched man, who said unto him,
“For God’s sake remember me in thy prayers.” And he remembered the words of the Holy
Gospel: “There is no greater love than this, that a man should give his life for his friend”
(John xv, 13). And this saint continued to torture himself with every kind of torture, and
he besought our Lord Jesus Christ on behalf of the soul of that sinner and to have mercy
upon him. And he tortured himself and died five times; and Saint Michael the archangel
appeared unto him and said unto him, “Thou shalt not kill thyself. It is not meet for Him to
have mercy on that sinner. And his sin shall not be remitted unto him, for God is righteous
and He doeth judgment and justice. He doth not show grace unto him who is unworthy of
grace, and He doth not punish the man who doth not deserve punishment.” And having
killed himself once in beseeching God on behalf of the soul of that sinner, Michael the
archangel came unto him, and said unto him, “Do not kill thyself, for God will not have
576

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
mercy upon that sinner.” Then Abba Latsun drowned himself in the sea, (or, river) and
died. And straightway there was a mighty peal of thunder, and our Lord Jesus Christ came
down from heaven, and He sat on the shore and He commanded Saint Michael, and he
brought the saint up out of the water, and raised him up alive from the dead. And our Lord
Jesus Christ said unto him, “Peace be unto thee, O My chosen one, Latsun, who dost thou
kill thyself time after time for the sake of that sinner? Mercy doth not befit him. His sins
are very many, and they are most abominable; they are the very worst sins, and it is not
right for a man to speak of them”; and Saint Abba Latsun did not answer. And he said
unto Him, “I beseech Thee, O my Lord Jesus Christ, to show mercy on that sinner in
punishment; if Thou wilt not show mercy to him then take my soul with him into
punishment.” And our Lord knew that the saint would kill himself many times for the sake
of that sinner. And our Lord commanded and He touched his hands, and made him like the
dust; and He said, “This soul shall not suffer punishment from this time forward, but it
shall never find mercy, and shall be like the dust”; and Saint Abba Latsun glorified our
Lord Jesus Christ because of the great compassion and mercy which He showed to that
wretched man, and because He had brought him out of punishment. And after this our
Lord said unto Abba Latsun, “Verily I say unto thee, O My chosen one Latsun, whosoever
shall celebrate thy commemoration, or shall give incense, or an offering, or oil, or wax, or
shall satisfy the hungry, or give drink to the thirsty, or clothe the naked for thy name’s sake
on the day of thy commemoration, or shall write the history of thy fight, I will write his
name in the Book of Life in the heavens, and will blot out his sins.” And when our Lord
Jesus Christ had said these things unto him, He went up into heaven with great glory. And
Abba Latsun rejoiced with a great joy, and returned to his cave, and dwelt there fighting
the fight for many days; and having finished his fight and pleased God he died in peace.
Salutation to Abba Latsun.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of Abba Palamon, the great pilgrim
and anchorite, who rejected the world, and dwelt in a monastery. He devoted himself to
God, and he fought so many fights that Satan became weary of fighting against him. This
saint dwelt for very many days in silence and solitude; he never laughed, and he never
spoke to anyone, but he wept for his sins by day and by night. Often Satan would come (?)
to him to amuse himself with him, and to laugh at him, but he was not able to rejoice (?)
over him wholly, for [the saint] was sad and clung to the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and because of this Satan was wroth with him. One day Saint Palamon rose up and
departed to Egypt, in order to sell the things, which he had made with his hands. And as
he was going along the road, and was weeping so bitterly that his eyes were nearly washed
out of his head by the abundance of his tears, Satan led him astray on the road, and would
not let him know where he was going; and at the end of six days the elder, being well nigh
[dead] through hunger and thirst, fell upon the earth. But God, the Lover of mankind, did
not allow His servant Palamon to be destroyed through Satan, and He drove away the
unclean spirit, and set it afar off from him. And when the elder knew everything, which
had happened to him, he cried out, saying, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, help me.” And
straightway he heard a voice, which said unto him, “Fear not, for the Enemy shall not
prevail over thee. But rise up and go a little towards the north, and there thou shalt find a
righteous man, and elder monk, who dwelleth in the fastness of the mountain; his name is
Latsun, and he hath undertaken many labors for My Name’s sake. Tell him everything
which hath happened unto thee from thy youth up, and how Satan hath tempted thee; he
shall pray for thee that thy sin be forgiven thee.” And straightway the holy and blessed
Palamon rose up, and he took some of the things which his hands had made, and he
577

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
departed to the mountain in the north, reciting as he went the psalm of David which saith,
“O Lord deliver me for Thy Name’s sake”--to the end of the same (Psalm 79), and also the
eighth psalm, and at length God guided him to the place where the elder Saint Latsun was.
When the elder Saint Latsun saw him, he rejoiced and he embraced him and took him up to
the top of the rock. After they had prayed, and sat down, Abba Palamon began to weep
bitterly, and he told him all the sin, which he had committed from his youth up, and
begged earnestly for forgiveness; and he also told him, how Satan had tempted him. And
he said unto him, “One day when I was journeying in Egypt to sell the work of my hands,
Satan came to me, and made my mind to go astray, and he would not allow me to call upon
the Name of my Lord Jesus Christ. And he showed me a city, which had been built, like
the city of a king, and in it were waters, and gardens, and trees. And as I was thinking how
I should sell the work of my hands, he appeared unto me in the form of a woman, who was
sorrowing for the death of her husband, who had left her much money. And she said unto
me, ‘I will buy from thee.’ And she brought me into the upper room of her house, and she
lifted down the basket from my head, and she made me to sit down and washed my feet.
And she commanded her handmaidens to bring a table and wine, and she besought me
frequently to eat with her; and we ate, and drank, and were drunken. And as we were
talking together all the maidservants went out and we two were left together. And
straightway mine eyes burned like fire with the lust of fornication, and I remembered not
God Who is in the heavens, nor His angels who serve therein, and I was like one who lay
with her often. Afterwards, when I woke up, I looked about me and I could find nothing.
There was no woman, no house, no table, no people, no beasts, no waters, and no gardens;
but I found my head running round under the mountain of my abode, and I was as if I had
neither eaten nor drunk. Then I wept much, and I saw Satan standing far from me, and
laughing at me. And he said unto me, ‘Woe be to thee Palamon, the pilgrim, who dost jest
and laugh with me. Behold I can snare thee like a bird!’ When I heard his words I made
the sign of the Cross over him, and he fled from me. And now, O my father Latsun, I take
refuge in thy holiness; pray to God to forgive me my sins and my error.” And Abba
Latsun, answered and said unto Abba Palamon, “Fear not, I believe on God that He will
forgive thee thy sin.” The they rose up, and prayed three days and three nights, and there
came unto them a voice which said, “Fear not, O My faithful servants, henceforward the
Enemy shall not prevail over you. As for the sin which Palamon committed, I have placed
it on the head of Satan, and not only the sin of Palamon have I placed there, but I will place
upon him the sins of all those whom he hath tempted.” After this Abba Palamon was
blessed by Abba Latsun and he departed to his abode praising God; and he died in peace.
Salutation to Abba Palamon.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of the blessed Saint Abba Garima.
The father of this saint was Emperor of Rome, and his name was Masfeyanos; the name of
his mother was Sefengeya, and she was barren. And having besought our holy Lady, the
Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, she gave her this son; and she called his name “Isaac.”
When he had grown up she taught him the Books of the Church, and then Isaac was
appointed deacon. And the men of Rome having made him emperor, he sat and judged
justly and righteously for seven years. And when Saint Abba Pantaleon of the cell heard
[of him], he sent to him, saying, “O my son Isaac, let the dead bury their dead, and do thou
come and seek the kingdom of my Lord Jesus Christ”; and Abba Garima, having heard
him, forsook the kingdom, and went forth by night. Then the angel Saint Gabriel
appeared, and he carried him on his shining wing and at the third hour brought him into the
hand of Abba Pantaleon. Now the length of the road was a journey of ten months and four
578

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
days. The King of Ethiopia at that time was ‘Alameda. When Abba Pantaleon saw Saint
Isaac he embraced him, and kissed him, and then he arrayed him in the garb of the monk;
and the saint fasted and prayed so strenuously that his flesh congealed on his bones. Then
he went to a place [in] Madra and he lived there for three and twenty years, working
countless signs and wonders, and casting out devils, and healing the sick. One day he
sowed wheat at dawn, and reaped it in the evening, and some of it he offered as an
offering; and on the following day he took the remainder up to the threshing floor, and he
trod out the sheaves of wheat, and obtained therefrom seventy-seven measures of grain.
And he also planted a vine shoot on a rock, and it took root, and put forth leaves and bore
fruit immediately. And once when he was writing a letter, and the sun was about to set, he
adjured the sun to stand still and it did so until he had finished his letter. And the spittle,
which he spat out, remaineth unto this day, and is a means for healing the sick; and once
when a reed fell from his hand, it took root that very day. One day certain calumniators
went to Abba Pantaleon and said, “The priest Isaac consecrated the Offering after he had
eaten.” And Abba Pantaleon having gone to him caught him on the road, and he said unto
him, “Wait, man, so that I may tell thee a secret.” And Saint Isaac said unto him, “Let men
shut me in, and remove the stones from us”; and they turned aside for a distance of five
stadia. And Abba Pantaleon said unto him, “O my son Isaac, thou hast terrified me,” and
thereupon he was called Abba Garima. And having finished his good course, our
Redeemer appeared unto him, and promised him that [He would forgive the sins of] him
that should call upon his name, and celebrate his commemoration. And straightway he
was caught up in a shining cloud and disappeared. Salutation to Abba Garima.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of the saints of ‘Akuoren... and
Abba Palaomn, and Bartholomew, and Alexandra, and Alexander, the martyrs, and Joseph,
and ‘Arsema.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 18
(June 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Damianus, the thirty-fifth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This saint became a monk in his early years in the desert of Scete, and he
continued to fight, and to devote himself to God for seventeen years. He was appointed a
deacon in the monastery of Saint Abba John, and after this he went to the monastery of
Saint Abba Bataron, that is to say, the “Monastery of the Fathers.” which is to the west of
Alexandria, wherein he devoted himself to God and fought a fight like unto that of the
desert monks. When Abba Peter was made Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, he
sought for a learned man to live with him in his house and to help him with the work of the
archiepiscopate, and with whom he could take counsel concerning the work of the Church.
And men praised Damianus to him, and he had him brought to him, and asked him if he
would live with him; and Damianus agreed to this, and he dwelt in the archbishop’s house;
and he pursued a good course of life and all men loved him. When Abba Peter and
archbishop died, the bishops and the doctors agreed with one consent, and against his will
579

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
they made this Saint Damianus Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And his course of
life was wholly good. Frequently he wrote Epistles and Discourses, and sent them to all
the cities. Now there were in the desert of Scete of the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius
certain evil heretics of the following of Matlis, the heretic, and these men used to drink
wine on the night of the day of their Eucharist, and on the following day they would
receive the Holy Mysteries. As an excuse they said that our Lord Gave to His disciples
two cups. When He gave them the first cup He said unto them, “This is My Blood,” and
when He gave them the second cup He said, “This is My Blood.” And Saint Damianus
showed them their error, and said unto them, “The first cup was symbol of the joy of the
Old Covenant which was, in the Law of the Old Covenant, the Canon of the Apostles
banneth every one who tasteth anything before the Offering.” Some of the heretics turned
from their evil act and submitted to him, but some of them would not submit to him, and
would not turn from their counsel; and these he excommunicated and drove them forth. In
the days of this father died Theodore, Archbishop of the city of Antioch, and there was
appointed in his place a heretic who did not believe in the Holy Trinity, and who said that
God was One Person only, and that Three Persons ought not to be mentioned. And he sent
a letter [containing] his wicked Faith to Abba Damianus who, when he had read it, was
exceedingly sorry for him, because he did not find in his letter the name of the Holy
Trinity; and because he said therein, “It is not meet that men should mention the Trinity,
for God is One by Himself.” Thus did he speak in his madness, and this father was sorry
for him with a great sorrow. And he wrote to him a letter in which he explained the matter,
and said unto him, “If God is without division, [He is] one in His Godhead and Self. But
He is Three Aspects, Three Persons, and One Being, He is for ever, and [this] number [of
Persons] can neither be added to nor diminished.” And he wrote to him many testimonies
[derived] from the words of the Holy Scriptures, and wise teachings, to make him
understand. And he said unto him, “In God is life,” and he proclaimed that He is forever,
and that there is no [god] besides Him. And when this letter, which was full of the grace of
the Holy Spirit and the True Faith, reached this heretical Archbishop of the city of Antioch,
the darkness of his heart (or, mind), and his little knowledge did not permit him to
understand its meaning, but he continued in his infidelity. And this Abba Damianus
separated himself from communion with this heretic, and he did not allow any of his flock
to mention him at the time of prayer, and at the time of the Offering, for twenty years, that
is to say up to the time of his death. After this Abba Damianus continued to protect his
flock by means of his Epistles and Admonitions for a period of three and thirty years; and
he attained a good old age and pleased God, and died in peace. Salutation to Archbishop
Damianus.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of Isidore, the martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

580

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Senne 19
(June 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day became a martyr the new Saint George, that is to say, Mazakham, which is,
being interpreted, “Compeller,” in the days of the Muslims. This saint had a father who
was a Muslim [and was called] “Balaw,” and he married a woman who was a Christian
from the city of Demera, in the north of Egypt, and he begat her three sons, of whom this
saint was one, and he called his name “Zakhan.” And he used to go with his mother to
church, and he wished to become a Christian, and he begged his mother to be allowed to
receive the Holy Mysteries. And she said unto him, “It is impossible for anyone to receive
the Holy Mysteries unless he hath been baptized with Christian baptism, and is pure.”
Then she gave him a portion of the blessed Eulogia bread, and having swallowed it, the
taste thereof became in his mouth like that of honey. And he meditated in his heart, and
said, “If the taste of this portion of the bread of the Christians is like honey in my mouth,
what will be the taste of the Offering?” And he wished to become a Christian, and he
made it known that he intended to be a Christian, and intended to be baptized with
Christian baptism, and changed his name to George. And the Muslims oppressed him, and
seized him, and tortured him very severely. Then he escaped and fled to the city of Saft
Abu-trab, and dwelt therein for three years. When his history became known he departed
to the city of Ketur, and ministered in the church of Saint George, the martyr, and then he
returned to the city of Demera. And the Muslims of the city of Demera heard his history,
and they seized him and delivered him to the governor. Now the wife of the governor was
a Christian, and she said unto the governor, “Do not torture this holy man.” and he shut
him up in prison. And the Muslims assembled and smashed the door of the prison house,
and they beat the saint very severely, and they split open his head, and they left him well
nigh dead, that is to say, between life and death. When the Christians came in the morning
to bury him, for they thought that he was dead, they found him alive. After this the
Muslims gathered together and formed a company, and they said unto the saint, “If thou
dost not turn away from this counsel of thine we will torture thee very severely, and kill
thee.” And Saint George Mazakham said unto them, “Do what ye will. I will not deny my
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, the Creator of the heavens and of the earth.”
And they were wroth with him, and they hung him up on the mast of a ship, and tortured
him very severely; and after this the governor commanded the soldiers to take him down
and shut him up in prison, and they did as he commanded. And his wife made him to bear
patiently, and she strengthened him, and taught him that he must not think in his heart that
the punishment which had come [upon him] was because of his sins; that Satan should not
lead him astray, or destroy his toil; and that he must encourage himself in his heart with the
thought that he was a counterpart of the martyrs. And then the angel of God appeared unto
him, one night, and comforted him, and strengthened him, and promised him that he
should be numbered with the martyrs; and he informed him that on the following day they
would cut off his head. When the morning came the Muslims gathered together about the
governor, and demanded from him [permission] to cut off his head; and the governor
commanded them to take him, and to do what they wished with him. And they took him
out of prison, and cut off his head with the sword, near the church of the glorious angel
Michael in the city of Demera, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of
the heavens. Then they lighted a fire on his body, and that fire burned all that day and all
581

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
that night, but it neither consumed him nor touched him at all. After this the Muslims took
him and laid him in a basket, and cast him into the river, and by the Will of God he came
to the quay on the shore of an island, and his mother, who was waiting for him, took him
and made him ready for burial, and laid him in her house for a few days. After this they
built a church for him and laid him therein, and countless signs and wonders took place
there through him. Salutation to George, and salutation to the woman his friend.
And on this day also became a martyr Saint Besoy-nob, whose name meaneth “fine gold.”
This saint came from a city the name of which is Banos, in the district of Damietta, and he
was the son of noble and wealthy parents in that city. He was one of the soldiers of
Cyprianus, the governor of Athribis, and he believed on the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ. [And the governor of Athribis commanded his soldiers to bring him] into the city
of Athribis, and they took him to the city of Antinoe; and he stood before Arianus,
governor of the city of Antinoe, who was angry with him, and said unto him, “Cast incense
to the gods.” And he would not obey him, and was not afraid of him, and Arianus tortured
him severely. Then he commanded them to cut off his head with the sword, and they took
him outside the city, and a crowd of men from the city followed him. And in it was the
keeper of the lions of Arianus, the governor, and he had with him two lions bound with an
iron chain; and one of them rushed forward and broke the chain [and attacked the saint].
And the angel of God came to the saint and raised him up above the lions, and he flew
away with him until he brought him to the Fountain of the Sun, and the saint, who had his
eyes closed, did not know where he was going. And then they cut off his head with the
sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation
O Nub-Besoy, which is being interpreted, “fine gold.”
And on this day also became martyrs the five soldiers ‘Arsonophis, Peter, ‘Ascarion,
‘Arengis, and Belfeyos, who lived in the Palace of Diospolis. When the governor urged
them to sacrifice to the gods, the saints said unto him, “We will fulfill the commandment
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to Him only will we sacrifice.” When the governor heard
this he was wroth, and he commanded the soldiers to put them into a house, and not to give
them bread or water for two days. Then he ordered them to bring them to him, and when
they stood before him he said unto them, “Sacrifice ye to the gods.” And the saints said
unto him with one voice, “We are Christians, and we will not sacrifice to unclean devils.”
And the governor commanded the soldiers to chain them by their necks, and to take them
to another governor. And ‘Arengis said unto his brethren, “I tell you truth. I heard the
angel of God pronounce the names of the five of us.” And when the soldiers had brought
them to Deses, the governor, he took the first of them ‘Arsonophis, and said unto him,
“Sacrifice to the gods”; and when he refused to do so the governor commanded them to
fetter him, and to tie him to the tail of a horse, and drag him through the city. When they
had brought him into the city, he commanded them to cast him into the furnace of the
public baths. And they also tied him to a chariot to torture him, and hung him up head
downwards; and he kept his Faith and delivered up his soul. Next they brought Saint Peter,
and Deses said unto him, “Sacrifice.” And when he refused to do so the governor
commanded them to take him and fetter him, and to set up a post, and to hang him upon it,
head downwards, and to tie him to it in this position. And they also dug a hole in the
ground, and covered him up in it with earth, and made a mule to tread it down, but the
saint bore this, God helping him. When they brought him out his body was crushed (?) by
the excessive torture, and he was unable to speak; and then they tied him up in the hide of
an animal [and left him] without bread and water. And they brought ‘Arengis before the
582

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
governor, who said unto him, “Sacrifice,” and when he refused to do so, Deses
commanded them to bind him with fetters, and to scraped him, and to hang him up head
downwards. And having endured them, they tied him up in the hide of an animal [and left
him] without food and drink. Then they brought ‘Ascarion to the governor, who said unto
him, “Sacrifice, and have pity on thyself.” And when the saint refused to do so, Deses
commanded them to take him, and bind him in fetters, and scrape him, [and they did so,]
and they delivered him over to the keepers of the instruments of torture to torture him
severely. And they set up a tree, and hung him upon it head downwards. And when he
vanquished them by his endurance, they told the governor, and he commanded them to tie
him up in the hide of an animal, and to shut him up in a chamber to die of hunger and
thirst. And they brought to Deses Belfeyos, and the governor said unto him, “Sacrifice, so
that thou mayest not die.” When he refused to do so Deses commanded them to take him,
and bind him in fetters, and scrape him, and to drag him round the city. And they set up a
tree and hung him upon it, head downwards, and they tied a stone to his neck. And when
he wavered not in his Faith, they tied him up in the hide of an animal to die of hunger and
thirst; and they walled up the door of the house. And [the soul of] the blessed ‘Arengis
was nigh to go forth from his body. And ‘Arengis departed on the fifth day of the month
of Pohin, and when they had brought him out they built up the door against the two that
were left. And then the blessed ‘Ascarion died, holding the Faith, on the eighteenth day of
the month of Pohin; and when they had taken him out they built up the door against
Belfeyos. When the brethren visited the blessed man Belfeyos, he said unto them, “My
brethren, wait for me this night; I am going forth,” and then he delivered up his soul on the
nineteenth day of the month of Pohin. Salutation to ‘Arsonophis, and Peter, and ‘Ascarion,
and ‘Arengis, and Belfeyos.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of the holy fathers of Debre Kua’at.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 20
(June 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great prophet Elisha. This man came from a village of Israel, the
name of which was ‘Alamut; and his father’s name was Yosafet, and he was born in
Gilgal. And then he became the servant of Elijah, the prophet, and he was most obedient
to Elijah before he went up into heaven. And he went with him to the Jordan, and when
Elijah said unto him, “Ask of me what thou wilt.” he did not ask him for any of the
possessions and treasures of this world, but Elisha said unto Elijah, “Let a double portion
of the spirit which is upon thee be upon me.” And Elijah said unto him, “Thou hast asked
what is difficult, nevertheless if thou seest me when I go up from thee even thus shall it
be.” And as the two were going along together, chariots of fire came forth, and horse[s] of
fire, and in this wise Elijah went up into heaven. And Elisha the prophet saw him, and he
said unto him, “My father, and father of the strength and might of Israel”; and he snatched
at his garment and [rent it] in twain. And Elijah let fall his rough skin [cloak, and it fell
upon the head of Elisha the prophet; and the spirit of Elijah was doubled upon Elisha. For
583

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Elijah divided the waters of the Jordan into two parts once, but Elisha did so twice; and
Elijah raised one person from the dead, and Elisha raised two. And after this he divided
the river and passed between the two parts thereof. And when he went to Jericho the men
of the city asked him, saying, “Our water is bitter and the crops will not grow under it;
[make it sweet for us].” And Elisha took a pot, and put some salt therein, and cast it into
the well of water, and the water became very sweet. And he willed to make manifest a
great miracle when he cast the salt into the water; he changed what was bitter in the water
by means of salt, he made sweet what was salt by means of salt. One day as he passed
along the road the young boys of Israel mocked him, and he cursed them, and the wolves
carried off nine and forty youths in one day. And a certain woman of the wives of the
prophets came unto him, and said unto him, “My husband died owing a debt, and behold
they have seized my children for it.” And Elisha commanded her, saying, “Go and fill all
the jars which are in thy house with water, and borrow other vessels from thy neighbors,
and fill them all with water”; and by his prayer he changed the water in all the vessels into
sweet oil. And the woman sold the oil, and extinguished the debt, which was on her
husband. And Elisha blessed the barren woman and she bore a son. And when that child
grew up he fell sick of a fever and died, and Elisha prayed over him and restored him to
life. And when Naaman the Syrian came to him he cured him of his leprosy, and though
Naaman brought to him much money, and raiment of gold, he would accept nothing from
him. And when Geyaze (Gehazi), his servant, acted craftily and accepted some of those
possessions, secretly and without Elisha’s permission, the prophet had knowledge about it
through the Holy Spirit. And he cursed his servant, and Geyaze (Gehazi) became a leper,
and his sons and all his seed [were lepers]. And a great famine happened in those days,
and by the prayer of this prophet in one night it changed into a great abundance; and
besides this, the prophet wrought many signs and wonders. When he died and they were
burying him in a grave, they brought at the same time another dead man and laid him down
on the grave of the prophet; and that dead man came to life straightway, and he rose up and
followed the people, and departed to his house. And the prophet Elisha prophesied in the
reigns of four kings, who were Joram, and Ahaz, and Gotolya, the mother of Ahaz, and
John, the son of Ahaz; and all the days of his prophesying were fifty years and more. He
prophesied before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ six hundred years, and he died in
peace. Salutation to Elisha.
And on this day is celebrated the commemoration of ‘Arsastal, the martyr, and Minas of
Busar.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 21
(June 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Theodosius, the thirty-third Archbishop of the city
of Alexandria; it is after him that Christians in the land of Egypt were called
“Theodosians.” After this father was appointed archbishop, certain evil men rose up
against him, and drove him forth from his office on the advice of the emperor, and they
584

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
appointed in his place a certain man whose name of Acacianus, Archdeacon of the city of
Alexandria. This man was of the number of those who subscribed the statement that this
father was [not] worthy of the office of the archiepiscopate. And they drove out this father
to the city of Germanos, and he dwelt there for three months. And Abba Severus was
ordained in the country of Egypt in those days, and he comforted this father, and reminded
him that tribulation came upon the apostles, and also on John, the Mouth of Gold (i.e.
Chrysostom). Then this father went to the city of Malig, and dwelt there for two years.
And the men of the city of Alexandria rose up against the governor, and demanded their
shepherd, and he brought back this father Theodosius to his office, and expelled
Acacianus. And the story of him was heard by the Emperor Justinian from the God-loving
Empress Theodora; and she wrote a letter, saying, “He who was first appointed shall sit in
his office.” And one hundred and twenty priests formed themselves into a General
Council, and they subscribed a statement, saying, “Abba Theodosius was first appointed.”
And straightway Acacianus rose up before the people, and said, “I have transgressed; evil
men force me.” And then the people asked this father to remove the ban of
excommunication from Acacianus provided that he would promise never again to minister
as priest or deacon; and Acacianus agreed to this, and Theodosius removed the ban of
excommunication from him. Now the emperor was corrupt in his faith, and he imagined
that Archbishop Abba Theodosius agreed with him in his evil faith. And he wrote a letter
of his officers who were in the city of Alexandria, and said unto them, “If the Archbishop
Theodosius is at one with us in our belief, let another office be added to his
archiepiscopate, and let him be governor of the city of Alexandria; but if he be not at one
with us in belief, he shall go forth from his office.” And when this father heard these
words he said, “Thus said Satan to our Lord Christ in the desert, I will give thee all the
kingdom of the world and the glory thereof, if thou wilt worship me” (Matthew iv, 9).
And Saint Abba Theodosius rose up and went forth from the city of Alexandria, and
departed into Upper Egypt, and he dwelt there for a few days, strengthening the believing
people in the True Faith. And the emperor heard that the saint had gone forth from the city
of Alexandria, and he sent him a letter to persuade him, saying, “I want to meet you, I want
thee to bless me and to give me counsel.” And Abba Theodosius went to Constantinople,
and the archbishop, and all the people, and the soldiers went forth to welcome him; and
they set him upon a high throne, and disputed concerning the True Faith. And the emperor
continued to persuade the saint for many days, but the saint vanquished him with the words
of the Holy Scriptures, and with the words of the Fathers. And when he would not agree
with him, the emperor expelled him from his throne and sent him to Upper Egypt; and he
appointed in his place another man whose name was Paul. And when that Paul came to the
city of Alexandria, the people would not receive him, and he remained for a whole year,
but only a very few people received the Offering from his hands. When the emperor heard
of this he commanded the soldiers to shut the churches until the people submitted to Paul
the archbishop, and the believers used to go outside the city to the church of Saint Mark
the evangelist, and to the church of Cosmas and Damian, and partake of the Offering, and
have their children baptized with Christian Baptism; and when the emperor heard this he
had the churches opened. When Abba Theodosius heard this he was afraid that the
emperor would lead them astray, and he wrote a letter to the people which was full of
every kind of consolation, and he sent it to them, and strengthened them in the True Faith,
saying, “Take good heed and submit not yourselves to that heretic Paul.” And Theodosius
remained in exile in Upper Egypt for eight and twenty years, and he lived in the city of
Alexandria four years; and all the days of his life (sic) were two and thirty years. And this
585

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
father composed many Homilies and Treatises of Doctrine, and the believers in the country
of Egypt continued to be called “Theodosians” until the days of Abba Jacob, [when] they
were called “Jacobites.” And having finished his good course he died in peace. Salutation
to Theodosius.
And on this day also Basil and Bifantius became martyrs.
And on this day also took place the consecration of the house (church) of Abba Timothy in
the city of Damanhur. Salutation to the consecration of thy house. [Omitted in the
Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also are commemorated Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Salutation to
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel-Jacob. [Omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 22
(June 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the commemoration festival of the glorious Saints Cosmas and
Damianus, and their brethren, and their mother, and the consecration of their church, and
the manifestation of their miracles. And behold we have written their histories in the
section for the twenty-second day of the month of Hedar. Salutation to the holy house,
which was built for the sons of Theodada, after the period of apostasy, had passed.
And on this day also died Paul the Simple, the disciple of Abba Anthony. This Paul was a
peasant, and was very simple, and he married a woman who was beautiful in her person
and evil in her actions, and he begot children by her. One day when he came in from his
field he found her committing fornication; and when he saw her he laughed, and said unto
the man, “Take her and her child. I shall not be sorry, and I will go and become a monk.”
And when he had come to Abba Anthony, he put on the garb of the monk, and he followed
the footsteps of Anthony with prayer and fasting until the power [to cast out] demons, and
to heal, was given unto him. One day they brought a man who was possessed of an evil
devil to Anthony to heal, and Anthony commanded Paul to heal him. And Paul said unto
this devil, “Get thee out, Anthony saith unto thee”; and the Satan reviled him and
Anthony. And Paul said unto him, “If thou will not go out I will tell Christ, and thou shalt
see how He will punish thee”; and thus saying he went out at noonday, and stood up on a
stone, which the sun had heated. And he said, “As God liveth, I will not come down from
this rock, and I will neither eat nor drink until the demoniac is healed”; and straightway the
devil cried out and went forth in the form of a great serpent, and entered the Red Sea. This
Paul considered the works of men, and wept for sinners, and made intercession for them up to a good old
age; and he died in peace. Salutation to Paul.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

586

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Senne 23
(June 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Solomon, the king, the son of David, who reigned in Jerusalem, over
Judah and Israel; and the name of his mother was Bersabeh. And after God had rebuked
David for taking her from her husband, He slew his first child; and then David lay with
her, and she conceived and bore him a son, and he called his name “Solomon.” And when
he was twelve years old, and had grown up, and his father David the king had become old,
Bersabeh (Bathsheba) went into the royal chamber and prostrated herself before the king;
and he said unto her, “What hath befallen thee?” And she said unto him, “O my lord the
king, thou didst swear to thine handmaid by thy God, saying, Thy son Solomon shall reign
after me, and shall sit upon my throne.” And the king swore, saying, “As God liveth, Who
hath redeemed my soul from all my tribulation, according as I swear unto thee before the
Lord God of Israel, saying, Thy son Solomon shall reign after me, [even so shall it be].”
And Bersabeh (Bathsheba) bowed before the face of the king, and said, “My lord the king,
live for ever!” And David said, “Call Zadok the priest to me, and Benaiah, the son of
Yodahe (Jehoiada), and Nathan the prophet”; and they came to the king. And the king said
unto them, “Take the servants of your lord with you, and set my son Solomon upon my
mule, and take him down to Gihon, and anoint him there, and make him king over Israel (I
Kings 1:33). And blow the trumpet and say, ‘[Long] live the royal father Solomon’; and
come up, and follow him. He shall rise up on my throne because I have commanded that
he shall reign in my stead over Judah and Israel.” And Zadok the priest, and Benaiah, the
son of Yodahe (Jehoiada), and Nathan the prophet, and the Cherethite, and the Perethite,
went down, and they set Solomon on the mule of King David, and they took him into
Gihon. And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil from the Tabernacle, and anointed
Solomon, and he blew the horn, and all the people said, “[Long] live the royal father
Solomon.” And Solomon sat on the royal seat, and the servants of the king came and gave
thanks to their lord David, the king and they said unto him, “May God make good [to rest]
on the name of Solomon, and make his throne greater than thine!” And the king
prostrated himself on his bed, and spoke thus: “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel Who
hath given me this day seed to sit upon my throne whilst mine eyes can see!” And David
told Solomon his son the path of righteousness, and he committed him to safe keeping,
because of Joab and Shimei, the son of Gera; and David died. And the Wisdom of
Solomon was very much greater than that of the children of Israel who had been before
him, and that of the wise men of Egypt; and he judged all kingdoms, and the peoples
brought him gifts all the days of his life. And his provision for one day was thirty
measures of fine flour, and sixty measures of crushed grain, and ten fat oxen and twenty
unstalled oxen, and one hundred sheep, and harts, and roebucks, and fallow deer and fatted
fowl. And he had forty thousand horses which drew chariots, and ten (twelve ?) thousand
horsemen. And Solomon sacrificed in Gibeon ten hundred offerings. And God appeared
unto him in a dream and said unto him, “Ask thou a petition.” And Solomon said unto
Him, “Thou, O God, didst show mercy unto Thy servant David, my father, since he walked
righteously before Thee, and Thou hast made his son to sit on his throne. Now, I am a
little child, and I know not my coming in or my going out, and Thy servant is among a
great and innumerable people; and he hath no heart wherewith to hear and to administer
righteous judgment to Thy people.” And God said unto him, “Because thou hast asked Me
587

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
for the power to understand judgment, and hast neither asked Me for many days [of life],
nor for much riches, behold I have given thee a heart and wisdom the like of which no man
before thee hath ever had, and none who shall rise up after thee shall ever have. And what
thou didst not ask of Me I give thee, riches and glory (honor) so great that there shall be no
man in the kingdom like unto thee.” After this Solomon went to Jerusalem and he stood
up before the Ark of the Law of God, and offered the sacrifices of peace. That day there
stood up before him two women who were harlots, and one of them said, “Hear me, O
lord, I and this woman live in the same house, and we have brought forth children. On the
third day whilst we were sleeping, she lay upon her son and killed him, and she took my
child from my breast and said unto me, ‘He is my child’; and the other woman said, “It is
my son who is alive.’” And the king said, “Bring a butcher’s knife and cut the child in
twain, and give one half of him to this woman, and one half of him to that.” And the
woman whose son was alive answered and said, “Give him to her alive, and do not kill
him”; and Solomon said, “Give the living child unto her who said, Do not kill him.” When
Israel heard they were afraid before the face of the king, when they saw the wisdom of
God, which was upon him. And he spoke three thousand proverbs and [wrote] five
hundred songs. In the fourth year [of his reign] he founded the house of God, in the month
of Sane, in the second month, [and it was finished] in the eleventh year; and it was sixty
cubits long, and twenty cubits wide, and thirty cubits high. When Solomon had finished
the building of the house of God, he gathered together the elders of Israel and made them
to bring the Ark of God from the city of David into Zion, in the month of ‘Atamen
(Ethanim). and the priests carried the Ark, and the tabernacle of witness, and the king and
all Israel slaughtered countless sheep and oxen before the Ark. And the priests brought it
into its place within the shrine of the holy of holies, under the wings of the Cherubim,
which were spread out; and the wings of the Cherubim were over the place of the Ark.
And Solomon stood up before the altar of God, before the companies of Israel, and he
lifted up his hand to heaven, and prayed, and he made petitions to God in many prayers.
And when he had finished his prayers God made the sun to appear in heaven, and the king
blessed all the companies of Israel, and he slaughtered the peace offerings of God, four
thousand oxen and one thousand sheep; and the king made provision for the house of God.
And God appeared unto Solomon a second time, even as He appeared unto him in Gibeon,
and He said unto him, “I have heard thy prayer and the petition which thou hast made to
Me, and I will do for thee according to thy prayer and petition.” And Solomon reigned
forty years, and [he lived] twelve years before he reigned; and all the days of his life were
two and fifty years. And he died in peace. Salutation to Solomon.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Nob, the confessor. This saint was a
devoted monk and fighter in one of the monasteries of Upper Egypt. And when many
martyrs had shed their blood under the tortures of Diocletian, and [the people] had carried
away their bodies, they remembered Saint Abba Nob, and brought him to Arianus,
governor of Antinoe. And the governor said unto him, “Cast incense to Apollo, and cast
away this thy garb of the monk.” And the saint answered and said unto him, “This shall
never be done by me, and I will never abandon my Lord Jesus Christ, and I will not
worship idols of stone.” And the governor tortured him with every kind of torture, and the
saint endured them by the might of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then the governor banished him
to Five Cities, and [the governor] cast him into a pit; and he lived therein for seven years,
until God blotted out Diocletian and made Constantine, the righteous, emperor. And
Constantine sent out an Edict into all countries ordering his officers to release all those
who were in prison for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; and he commanded them to
588

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
bring these prisoners to him, so that he might be blessed by them. And he said unto his
messengers, “If ye cannot bring them all, bring to me their honored ones, and those who
are learned, and the elders among them, so that they may bless me, and lay their hand upon
my head, and especially those who are well known, that is to say, Abba Zacharias from the
city of Ahnas, and Maximus from the city of the Fayyum, and Agabius from the city of
Dakhnin, and Abba Nob from the city of Balaos.” And the emperor’s messenger went
round about in all the countries, and the officers brought out all those who were shut up in
prison, and they rejoiced and glorified God and sang to Him. And the messenger of the
emperor sought for Abba Nob, but the holy man having been expelled from Five Cities
(Pentapolis), had gone to the city of Basla, opposite his city, where he lived and wore
apparel of iron. And the messenger of the emperor found him, and took him with him, and
he made him embark in a boat, and at length he arrived at the city of Antinoe. And the
Christians gathered together, and there were four bishops among them, and they made
Abba Nob a priest against his will; and he consecrated the Offering and administered to the
people the Holy Mysteries. And when he had finished the Office he cried out and said,
“Holiness to the holy ones! Let him that is holy receive holiness! God be with you all!”
Then he saw our Lord Jesus Christ sitting upon the altar, and He forgave the sins of the
people who were penitent. After this the saints followed the apostle to the emperor; now
they were in number two and sixty. And they made ready for them two and sixty chariots,
and each of them rode upon a chariot. And as they passed along the road, virgins came
forth from the nunneries, which were there, and welcomed them; and the virgins were in
number seven hundred, and they sang to the saints until they were out of sight. And when
the saints came to the Emperor Constantine, he commanded his servants to wash them with
water, and to array them in new apparel, before they entered his presence; and they did as
he commanded. Now Saint Abba Nob did not wash himself with water, neither did he
change his apparel. Then the saints entered the presence of the emperor, and he was
blessed by them, and he kissed their wounds, and he paid them honor and gave them much
money, but they would take nothing from him except sacred furniture and vestments for
the churches. And after he had been blessed by them, and had embraced them, he set them
on their way and said farewell to them; and they returned to their country in peace. And
Saint Abba Nob went to his monastery and finished his fight nobly, and he departed to
Christ, Whom he loved. Salutation to Abba Nob.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of Markora, and Thomas, and
Philip.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 24
(July 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Abba Moses the Black became a martyr. Men have marveled at the
spiritual fight of this man, for he seized the kingdom of heaven by force, even as the Holy
Gospel saith (Matthew xi, 12). This saint was strong in body, and a mighty man in all his
deeds. He ate, he drank, he killed, he fornicated, and no man could stand up before him. It
589

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
is said of him that he could eat a whole sheep, and drink a skinful of wine at a sitting; he
was the slave of a man who worshipped the sun, and he himself, on several occasions,
lifted up his eyes to the sun and said, “O sun, if thou art God, make me to know it.” And
he used to say in his heart, “O thou God Whom I know not, make me to know Thee.” And
he heard some men saying that the monks of the desert of Scete knew God, and then he
rose up, and girded on his sword, and went and came to the desert of Scete. And he found
Saint Abba Isidore the priest, and when he saw him, he was afraid of him. And Abba
Moses said, “I am Moses the Black, and I have come to you that ye may tell me about
God, and make me to know Him.” And Isidore took him to Abba Macarius, who
admonished him, and taught him the Prayer of Faith (i.e. the Belief), and baptized him with
Christian baptism. And he became a monk and lived in the desert, and he fought a fight
which was greater than that fought by many saints; and Satan warred upon him because
formerly he used to eat to excess, and commit fornication. And he informed Abba Isidore
about everything which came upon him in his fight with the Enemy; and Abba Isidore
comforted him, and taught him what to do. And in addition to his great fight he used,
when the holy elders were asleep, to go round to their cells, and take their water-pots out of
them, and go and fill them with water, and put them back in their cells; now the water was
a long way off. And he continued his fight for many years. And Satan was envious of
him, and he smote him severely with a severe disease in his foot, and he became very ill
and lay down sick. And when he knew that Satan had smitten him, he increased his ascetic
practices and spiritual fight, and his body became dried up like wood, which has been
scorched with fire. And God saw his endurance, and healed him of his disease, and
removed the sickness and the attacks of Satan; and the grace of the Holy Spirit descended
upon him. And five hundred brethren gathered together to him, and he became their abbot,
and they chose him to make him a priest. And when they set him in the sanctuary, the
archbishop wished to try him, and to get knowledge of his spiritual fight. And the
archbishop said unto the holy elders, “Why have ye brought this black man here? Take
him away.” And Moses went out reproaching himself, and he said, “They have treated
thee rightly, O black man, O thou whose face is horrible,” and after this the archbishop
called him and laid his hand upon him, and made him a priest. And the archbishop said
unto him, “Behold, thou hast become white, all of thee, within and without.” One day the
holy elders came to him, and he had no water with him, and they saw him go out and come
in many times; and after this it rained a great rain which filled the skins in their cells. And
the holy elders asked him, saying, “Why didst thou go out and come in many times?” And
he said unto them, “I said unto God, If Thou dost not give me water wherewith to give Thy
servants to drink, where am I to obtain water to give them to drink?” And in His mercy He
sent us water. At that time Abba Moses went with the elders to Saint Abba Macarius, and
Abba Macarius said unto them, “Behold, I see among you one to whom belongeth the
crown of martyrdom.” And Abba Moses answered and said unto him, “Peradventure I am
he, O my father. For it is written, ‘He who hath slain with the knife shall die by the knife’”
(Matthew xxvi, 52). And when the Barbarians came, Abba Moses said unto the brethren
who were there with him, “Behold the Barbarians have come; let him among you who
wisheth to flee, let him flee”; and they answered and said unto him, “And wilt not thou, O
our father, flee?” And he said unto them, “Behold, I have for many years been waiting for
this day, because of the word of our Lord Who said, He who hath killed with the knife
shall die by the knife”; and the Barbarians came and killed him. And with him were seven
brethren who did not wish to flee, but one of them hid himself behind a bed, and he saw
the angel of God, with a crown in his hand, standing waiting for him; and he went out to
590

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the Barbarians, and they killed him. Observe, O our brethren, the power of repentance and
what it doth. It changed a man who was an infidel, and a murderer, and a fornicator, and a
thief, and made him a father, and a teacher, and a comforter, and a priest, and one who laid
down the Rule and Canon of the monks, and one who is mentioned at the altar in all the
churches. And his body abideth to this day in Debre Badremos in the desert of Scete, and
many signs and miracles are made manifest through it. Salutation to Moses the Black.
Salutation to the six brethren who died with him, and were slain by the Barbarians.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 24
(July 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Abba Moses the Black became a martyr. Men have marveled at the
spiritual fight of this man, for he seized the kingdom of heaven by force, even as the Holy
Gospel saith (Matthew xi, 12). This saint was strong in body, and a mighty man in all his
deeds. He ate, he drank, he killed, he fornicated, and no man could stand up before him. It
is said of him that he could eat a whole sheep, and drink a skinful of wine at a sitting; he
was the slave of a man who worshipped the sun, and he himself, on several occasions,
lifted up his eyes to the sun and said, “O sun, if thou art God, make me to know it.” And
he used to say in his heart, “O thou God Whom I know not, make me to know Thee.” And
he heard some men saying that the monks of the desert of Scete knew God, and then he
rose up, and girded on his sword, and went and came to the desert of Scete. And he found
Saint Abba Isidore the priest, and when he saw him, he was afraid of him. And Abba
Moses said, “I am Moses the Black, and I have come to you that ye may tell me about
God, and make me to know Him.” And Isidore took him to Abba Macarius, who
admonished him, and taught him the Prayer of Faith (i.e. the Belief), and baptized him with
Christian baptism. And he became a monk and lived in the desert, and he fought a fight
which was greater than that fought by many saints; and Satan warred upon him because
formerly he used to eat to excess, and commit fornication. And he informed Abba Isidore
about everything which came upon him in his fight with the Enemy; and Abba Isidore
comforted him, and taught him what to do. And in addition to his great fight he used,
when the holy elders were asleep, to go round to their cells, and take their water-pots out of
them, and go and fill them with water, and put them back in their cells; now the water was
a long way off. And he continued his fight for many years. And Satan was envious of
him, and he smote him severely with a severe disease in his foot, and he became very ill
and lay down sick. And when he knew that Satan had smitten him, he increased his ascetic
practices and spiritual fight, and his body became dried up like wood, which has been
scorched with fire. And God saw his endurance, and healed him of his disease, and
removed the sickness and the attacks of Satan; and the grace of the Holy Spirit descended
upon him. And five hundred brethren gathered together to him, and he became their abbot,
and they chose him to make him a priest. And when they set him in the sanctuary, the
archbishop wished to try him, and to get knowledge of his spiritual fight. And the
archbishop said unto the holy elders, “Why have ye brought this black man here? Take
him away.” And Moses went out reproaching himself, and he said, “They have treated
591

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
thee rightly, O black man, O thou whose face is horrible,” and after this the archbishop
called him and laid his hand upon him, and made him a priest. And the archbishop said
unto him, “Behold, thou hast become white, all of thee, within and without.” One day the
holy elders came to him, and he had no water with him, and they saw him go out and come
in many times; and after this it rained a great rain which filled the skins in their cells. And
the holy elders asked him, saying, “Why didst thou go out and come in many times?” And
he said unto them, “I said unto God, If Thou dost not give me water wherewith to give Thy
servants to drink, where am I to obtain water to give them to drink?” And in His mercy He
sent us water. At that time Abba Moses went with the elders to Saint Abba Macarius, and
Abba Macarius said unto them, “Behold, I see among you one to whom belongeth the
crown of martyrdom.” And Abba Moses answered and said unto him, “Peradventure I am
he, O my father. For it is written, ‘He who hath slain with the knife shall die by the knife’”
(Matthew xxvi, 52). And when the Barbarians came, Abba Moses said unto the brethren
who were there with him, “Behold the Barbarians have come; let him among you who
wisheth to flee, let him flee”; and they answered and said unto him, “And wilt not thou, O
our father, flee?” And he said unto them, “Behold, I have for many years been waiting for
this day, because of the word of our Lord Who said, He who hath killed with the knife
shall die by the knife”; and the Barbarians came and killed him. And with him were seven
brethren who did not wish to flee, but one of them hid himself behind a bed, and he saw
the angel of God, with a crown in his hand, standing waiting for him; and he went out to
the Barbarians, and they killed him. Observe, O our brethren, the power of repentance and
what it doth. It changed a man who was an infidel, and a murderer, and a fornicator, and a
thief, and made him a father, and a teacher, and a comforter, and a priest, and one who laid
down the Rule and Canon of the monks, and one who is mentioned at the altar in all the
churches. And his body abideth to this day in Debre Badremos in the desert of Scete, and
many signs and miracles are made manifest through it. Salutation to Moses the Black.
Salutation to the six brethren who died with him, and were slain by the Barbarians.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 25
(July 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Judah (Jude), the apostle and martyr, became a martyr; he was the son of
Joseph the carpenter and was one of the Seventy-two disciples. This saint preached in
many cities, and he came into the island and preached therein, and built a church there.
And he went to the city of Edessa and healed Abgar, the King of Edessa, of his illness, and
he baptized him with Christian baptism. After this he went to ‘Araz and preached therein,
and baptized many of the people thereof with Christian baptism. And the governor of that
city seized him and tortured him with many tortures; he nailed iron cases on his feet, like
sandals, and made him run in them for the distance of a stade, and he hung him up, and
shot arrows at him, and the saint delivered up his soul. Before they tortured him he sent an
Epistle to the believers, and that Epistle is the seventh in the Book of the Apostles. It is
full of wisdom and grace, and by its means he converted many of the pagans and brought
592

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them into the Faith of our Lord Christ during his lifetime and before his death. Salutation
to Judah (Jude), whose feet had red-hot iron cases nailed on them.
And on this day also died the holy father and fighter Abba Peter, the thirty-fourth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This father was made archbishop when the Emperor
‘Asbasyanos (Vespasian) drove out Archbishop Theodos who would not agree with his
opinion, and he sat on the throne of Mark the evangelist without bishops for many years.
And the emperor would neither permit the bishops, nor his nobles who were in the city of
Alexandria, to appoint an archbishop. And after a few days there was appointed over the
city of Alexandria a good, and excellent, and Orthodox governor, and the elders and the
believers gathered together to him, and informed him of their grief because they had no
archbishop. And he commanded them to go out to Debre Zegag, that is to say Debre
Mahew, under the pretence of [going to] pray, and to appoint for themselves an
archbishop. Then they rejoiced at this counsel and they took Abba Peter, who was a priest,
and they went out forthwith to Zegag, and they appointed him archbishop, and rejoiced in
him. Before this Saint Severus, the holy man, died, and the city of Antioch remained
without an archbishop. When the believers of the city of Antioch heard that Abba Peter
had been appointed archbishop, they also appointed to be their archbishop a certain
believer whose name was Theophanius, and he and father Abba Peter were of one accord
in the matter of the True Faith. And they wrote letters to each other on theological matters,
and each preached the doctrine of his friend, and mentioned him at the time of prayer and
at the Offering, but they were unable to enter each other’s city, for Abba Peter lived in
Debre ‘Anabanya, which was to the south of Debre Zegag, and Abba Theophanius lived in
Debre ‘Aftonyas, which was outside the city of Antioch. In those days there were in the
city of Alexandria six hundred monasteries, and two and thirty villages, and all their
inhabitants belonged to the True Faith (except the [so-called] Christians of the city of
Alexandria), and all the districts of Mesr (Cairo) and Upper Egypt, and all the monks of
the monasteries of the desert of Scete, and Ethiopia, and Noba. All these were of the True
Faith, and they accepted the appointment of father Abba Peter as archbishop, and they
walked in his commands; and he never ceased to write to them Epistles, and he sent them
to all believers and strengthened them in the True Faith. And he used to go round to all the
monasteries of the city of Alexandria and the villages thereof, and teach the people, and
admonish them, and strengthen them. And he had a certain holy and learned disciple
whose name was Damianus, and who became archbishop after him, and he used to help
him in all the work and in directing the people. And this father Abba Peter once came into
the city of Alexandria, and saw the works of its people, and inspected them and
strengthened them. And thus he remained in his office, and traveled about like the
Apostles, and shepherded his flock for a period of two (?) years; and he was strong in the
True Faith and died in peace. Salutation to Peter who was made archbishop at Zegag.
On this day also died Pilate, the confessor. Salutation to Pilate who washed his hands of
the Blood of Jesus Christ. [Waiting in the Bodleian MS.]
And the doctors of the Church had decreed that on this day Christians shall celebrate the
festival of Peter and Paul, that they may bless the entrance of the winter season. Salutation
to Peter and to Paul, [and to] the sequence of the winter. [Wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
593

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Senne 26
(July 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the commemorative festival of the glorious angel Gabriel, the
Archangel, and of the consecration of his church, in Debre Naklon, in the desert of the
Fayyum, and of the manifestation of his miracles therein. And the wood of the roof inside
the church [gave] indications concerning the rise of the river of Egypt, for during the
Offering water used to appear upon it like sweat. If there were to be abundance that year,
many drops of water would drop from it, but if there were to be hunger, the water would
appear on it only in the form of sweat. And the glorious angel, the Archangel Michael,
performed many miracles. Salutation to the consecration of they house, O Gabriel.
And on this day also died the great prophet Joshua, the son of Nun, the disciple of Moses,
the chief of the prophets. This prophet was obedient, and humble, and perfect and lowly
before Moses the prophet, and for this reason the spirit of Moses the prophet dwelt upon
him, and he prophesied in the days of Moses the prophet. When Moses the prophet died,
Joshua received the people by the command of God, and God said unto him, “As I was
with Moses My servant even so will I be with thee. Be strong and mighty, and keep the
Law, which I commanded Moses My servant to keep. Go not far from it, and turn not
aside from it, neither to the right hand nor the left. Let not thy mouth cease from reading
the Book of the Law, but meditate therein by day and by night, so that thou mayest keep
and hold fast to, and do everything which is written therein.” And the heart of Joshua was
strong and he sent spies to Jericho, and they came and examined the land, and they hid
with Rahab the harlot, and they made a covenant with her and with all the men of her
house, that they would not kill her, and she sent them away. And Joshua likewise divided
the Jordan for them, and the children of Israel passed through it, and he made the river for
them like a wall. And he opened (i.e. conquered) Jericho, going round the walls thereof
seven times, and he slew all that were therein, both man and beast. And he opened many
cities, now they were two and thirty in number, and he slew two and thirty kings. And all
the peoples feared the children of Israel, and because of the greatness of their fear of him
(i.e. Joshua), the men of the city of Gibeon made a pretence to him. Then dressed
themselves in ragged raiment and they carried with them old sackcloth of hair, and old
shoes, and dried and moldy bread. And they went to Joshua, and said unto him, “Behold,
we have come from a far country, and we want you to give us a promise that thou wilt not
kill us.” And Joshua, and the Rabbis of the children of Israel, answered and said unto
them, “Tell us truly whether ye dwell in this land.” And they answered and said unto
them, “Verily we have come from a far country”; and then they showed them their dried
and moldy food, and their old garments, and Joshua believed them and swore to them that
he would not kill them. And when Joshua heard that those people lived nigh unto them, he
said unto them, “Why did ye come with deceit?” and then he made them servants of the
house of God. And when the five kings of the Amorites heard [this], they rose up against
the men of Gibeon, and the [Israelites] helped the people of Gibeon, and made a great
slaughter of them. And on those of them who fled God cast hailstones from heaven, and
He blotted them out. And when the sun was nigh to set Joshua said before the children of
Israel. “O sun, stand still over the city of Gibeon, and thou moon also over the city of
‘Abakon.” And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed firm, until God was avenged on
594

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
His enemies. And Joshua divided the land of their inheritance among the children of
Israel, and he gave the priests cities to dwell in, and land for their beasts. And he set apart
six cities of refuge wherein all those who had committed a murder unwittingly might
dwell, according as God commanded him. And when the days of Joshua were one hundred
and ten years, and he had arrived at a good old age, he gathered together the children of
Israel, and commanded them to keep the commandment of the Law of the Torah, and not
to transgress it, and to be strong in the worship of God. And he told them, saying, “The
Lord God is jealous, and if ye worship other [gods] He will blot you out quickly.” And
after this he died in peace and was buried in the grave, which Jacob bought from the
children of Amer for a hundred sheep in the land of Nablos; and the children of Israel
mourned for him with a great mourning for thirty days. Salutation to Joshua, who was
devoted to Moses and at length, received a double portion of his spirit.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 27
(July 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Ananias the apostle. The apostles appointed this saint Bishop of the city
of Damascus, and he preached in the districts round about the preaching of the life-giving
Gospel. And he preached in the house of Gabriel also and converted many of the men
thereof to the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he baptized them with Christian baptism,
and illumined them with the light of the True Faith. And he baptized Paul the apostle,
when God sent him to him, and he laid his hand upon him, and upon his eyes, and God
wrought great miracles by his hands; and many of the Jews and Gentiles believed through
his preaching. And after this Lucianus the governor seized him, and tortured him with
divers kinds of severe tortures, and he cut open his sides with knives, and burned him with
fiery torches. And after this they took him outside the city, and the governor commanded
the soldiers to stone him with stones, and they stoned him; and he delivered up his soul
into the hands of our Lord Jesus Christ, for Whose Name he died. Salutation to Ananias.
And on this day also Saint Thomas, of the city of Sandalat, became a martyr. When the
days of this saint from the city of Sandalat were eleven years, Michael, the angel of God,
appeared unto him when he was asleep in a field; now he was a swineherd, and he
commended him to go and to confess our Lord Jesus Christ; and he rose up, and taking
with him only a whip of string, he departed to the city of Alexandria, and confessed our
Lord Jesus Christ before its governor. And the governor said unto him, “Worship the
idols,” and he promised to make him his scribe if he did so; and Saint Thomas was wroth
with him, and he shook out that whip of string, and beat the governor severely with it. And
the governor had him seized, and tortured very severely, and he cut his body with iron
saws; and the saint begged for help from our Lord Jesus Christ, Who sent His angel to him,
and healed his wounds. And the governor having shut him up in prison, the keeper of the
prison asked him to heal his son who was sick, and the saint gave him the whip of string,
and said unto him, “Lay this upon thy son, and by the might of God he shall recover
straightway”; and the keeper of the prison did as the saint commanded him, and his son
595

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
recovered forthwith. When the governor heard of this he had the saint brought before him,
and he said unto him, “Sacrifice to the idols”; and, laughing at him, the saint said [that he
would do so]. And the governor rejoiced exceedingly, and took him with him, and carried
him to the house of idols. And the saint asked our Lord Jesus Christ to destroy the idols,
and straightway they were smashed in pieces. And the devil who was over them leaped
upon the governor, and choked him until he confessed, saying, “There is no god except the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God.” When the people saw this, they marveled
exceedingly and they cried out, saying, “There is no god except the Lord Jesus Christ.”
And after this those who had not believed shut the saint up in a dark cave, wherein he
remained for fifteen days without food and drink; and the angel of God used to visit him.
Then they hung him up, head downwards, until much blood ran down out of his mouth;
and the angel of God came down and delivered him. And a certain woman had a blind
son, and she took some of the blood, and smeared it upon the eyes of her son, and he
received his sight straightway. And after this the governor shut the saint up in prison for a
few days. Then he had him brought out, and the soldiers set a lioness at him, and she came
to him and licked his feet; and they also smote him upon his mouth with iron goads. Now
there were with him under the torture Saint Babnuda, of the city of Bandara, and Saint
Moses from the city of Balkim, and they encouraged each other to endure. And after this
they boiled oil and pitch together, and poured it over the head of Saint Thomas, and no
injury happened to him. And they also mutilated him, and made him put on the iron boots,
and hung a large stone from his neck. When they were tired of torturing him, Arianus the
governor took him with him to bring him to the city of Antinoe. And when they arrived at
Taw, they cut off the head of Saint Thomas, and he received the crown of martyrdom in
the kingdom of the heavens. And those who were tortured with him during the days of his
torture were six (or, seven) hundred men and nine women. Salutation to Thomas, and
salutation to those who were tortured with him; [and these were in number] three thousand
(sic) men and nine women.
And on this day also are commemorated four and twenty martyrs, and Mamas, and Silas,
and Lazarus, the beggar, who is mentioned in the Gospel of Luke (Chapter xvi, verse 20).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 28
(July 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Theodosius, the thirty-third Archbishop of the city
of Alexandria; it is after him that Christians in the land of Egypt were called
“Theodosians.” After this father was appointed archbishop, certain evil men rose up
against him, and drove him forth from his office on the advice of the emperor, and they
appointed in his place a certain man whose name of Acacianus, Archdeacon of the city of
Alexandria. This man was of the number of those who subscribed the statement that this
father was [not] worthy of the office of the archiepiscopate. And they drove out this father
to the city of Germanos, and he dwelt there for three months. And Abba Severus was
ordained in the country of Egypt in those days, and he comforted this father, and reminded
596

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him that tribulation came upon the apostles, and also on John, the Mouth of Gold (i.e.
Chrysostom). Then this father went to the city of Malig, and dwelt there for two years.
And the men of the city of Alexandria rose up against the governor, and demanded their
shepherd, and he brought back this father Theodosius to his office, and expelled
Acacianus. And the story of him was heard by the Emperor Justinian from the God-loving
Empress Theodora; and she wrote a letter, saying, “He who was first appointed shall sit in
his office.” And one hundred and twenty priests formed themselves into a General
Council, and they subscribed a statement, saying, “Abba Theodosius was first appointed.”
And straightway Acacianus rose up before the people, and said, “I have transgressed; evil
men force me.” And then the people asked this father to remove the ban of
excommunication from Acacianus provided that he would promise never again to minister
as priest or deacon; and Acacianus agreed to this, and Theodosius removed the ban of
excommunication from him. Now the emperor was corrupt in his faith, and he imagined
that Archbishop Abba Theodosius agreed with him in his evil faith. And he wrote a letter
of his officers who were in the city of Alexandria, and said unto them, “If the Archbishop
Theodosius is at one with us in our belief, let another office be added to his
archiepiscopate, and let him be governor of the city of Alexandria; but if he be not at one
with us in belief, he shall go forth from his office.” And when this father heard these
words he said, “Thus said Satan to our Lord Christ in the desert, I will give thee all the
kingdom of the world and the glory thereof, if thou wilt worship me” (Matthew iv, 9).
And Saint Abba Theodosius rose up and went forth from the city of Alexandria, and
departed into Upper Egypt, and he dwelt there for a few days, strengthening the believing
people in the True Faith. And the emperor heard that the saint had gone forth from the city
of Alexandria, and he sent him a letter to persuade him, saying, “I want to meet you, I want
thee to bless me and to give me counsel.” And Abba Theodosius went to Constantinople,
and the archbishop, and all the people, and the soldiers went forth to welcome him; and
they set him upon a high throne, and disputed concerning the True Faith. And the emperor
continued to persuade the saint for many days, but the saint vanquished him with the words
of the Holy Scriptures, and with the words of the Fathers. And when he would not agree
with him, the emperor expelled him from his throne and sent him to Upper Egypt; and he
appointed in his place another man whose name was Paul. And when that Paul came to the
city of Alexandria, the people would not receive him, and he remained for a whole year,
but only a very few people received the Offering from his hands. When the emperor heard
of this he commanded the soldiers to shut the churches until the people submitted to Paul
the archbishop, and the believers used to go outside the city to the church of Saint Mark
the evangelist, and to the church of Cosmas and Damian, and partake of the Offering, and
have their children baptized with Christian Baptism; and when the emperor heard this he
had the churches opened. When Abba Theodosius heard this he was afraid that the
emperor would lead them astray, and he wrote a letter to the people which was full of
every kind of consolation, and he sent it to them, and strengthened them in the True Faith,
saying, “Take good heed and submit not yourselves to that heretic Paul.” And Theodosius
remained in exile in Upper Egypt for eight and twenty years, and he lived in the city of
Alexandria four years; and all the days of his life (sic) were two and thirty years. And this
father composed many Homilies and Treatises of Doctrine, and the believers in the country
of Egypt continued to be called “Theodosians” until the days of Abba Jacob, [when] they
were called “Jacobites.” And having finished his good course he died in peace. Salutation
to Theodosius.
And on this day also Basil and Bifantius became martyrs.
597

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also took place the consecration of the house (church) of Abba Timothy in
the city of Damanhur. Salutation to the consecration of thy house. [Omitted in the
Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also are commemorated Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Salutation to
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel-Jacob. [Omitted in the Bodleian MS.]
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Senne 29
(July 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And on this day also nine fighters of the spiritual fight from Debre Tona (or, Kona)
became holy martyrs; these were Abba Basadi (‘Absadi), and Abba Cotolus, and Abba
‘Ardama, and Abba Muse (Moses), and Abba ‘Esey, and Abba Nikales (Mikalas), and
Abba Kal, the monk, whose name is Cotolus, and Abba Basodisa, and Cotolus; and they
were priests. And the angel of God appeared unto them, and commanded them, saying,
“Proclaim boldly our Lord Jesus Christ.” And they rose up straightway to go to the
governor, and they found a ship, and having embarked therein, these five (sic) fighters
made an agreement together and went to the governor; and Saint Abba Basadi (‘Absadi)
spoke to the governor boldly and without fear. And the governor asked him about his city,
and Abba Basadi (‘Absadi) told him that he was from the city of Tona, and his companions
also, and the governor commanded the soldiers to shut them up in prison. And after this he
brought them out, and tortured them very severely, and he commanded them to hang
stones from their necks, and to shut them up in prison again. And our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared unto them in the prison house ad made them strong to endure ... in the kingdom
of heaven. And after this the emperor sent them to the city of Alexandria, and they were
tortured there very severely. And then he threw them into two cauldrons full of sulphur
and pitch, and they lighted so great a fire under them that the flames rose up to a height of
twenty cubits. And after this he had them taken out of the cauldrons, and the soldiers cast
them into a red-hot oven; and our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto them, and raised them
up, whole and uninjured, and made them strong and restored them. And then they came to
the governor and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before him; and when the people saw
this one hundred and thirty of them believed, and became martyrs. And after this the
governor tortured the saints severely. And he had the idol Apollo, seated upon his throne,
brought to them, and commanded them to worship him, but they kicked him with their
feet, and he fell down from his throne, and was smashed in pieces; and the governor
commanded the soldiers and they cut off their feet. And they cut off the head of Abba
Basadi (‘Absadi) with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom
of the heavens. And after him they cut off the heads of the five (sic) others, and they burnt
Saint Cotolus in the fire, and they all received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of
the heavens. Salutation to the company of one hundred and thirty saints, the devoted
followers of the seven (sic) martyrs.

598

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also Abba Hor, and Abba Besoi, and Daydara (Yedra) their mother
became martyrs. Abba Horsa was a soldier in the army of Antioch, and he confessed our
Lord Jesus Christ. And the governor commanded the soldiers, and they cut off his right
hand, and they tied a rope to him, and an ox dragged him through the city. And they made
flat pieces of iron red-hot in the fire, and laid them upon his body, and they cut off his left
hand, and boiled some lead and poured it into his mouth. After this they thrust him into a
skin filled with vipers, and snakes, and scorpions, and then they beat him with rods. And
he cried out, saying, “O Jesus Christ, help me in all this torture”; and our Lord Jesus Christ
came down to him, and strengthened him, and raised him up sound and uninjured, even as
he was at first. And then his mother came and comforted him, and she rejoiced in his
strife; and one told the governor about her. And he had the mother of the saint brought,
and he said unto her, “Sacrifice to the idols,” and he raged at her, and [tried] to frighten
her; but she was not afraid of his raging, and she would not obey him. And he commanded
the soldiers to make iron rods red-hot in the fire, and to lay them on her sides, and when
they did so she rejoiced, and sang hymns to the Living God, and she ascribed holiness to
Him, and glorified Him because He had held her to be worthy to suffer for His Holy
Name. And after this she delivered up her soul, whilst she was under torture, and she
received the crown of martyrdom. And as for Saint Abba Hor they boiled him in a
cauldron he praised God and was without pain. And they informed the governor of this,
and he marveled exceedingly, and he was frightened and became filled with wrath. And he
rose up and came to the cauldron, having a spear in his hand, and he drove his spear into
the breast of the holy man, who delivered up his soul into the hand of God, and received
the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And they also tortured his brother
Abba Besoi very severely, and they cut off his head with the sword, and he received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to thee O Besoi, the
soldier, and to thy brother Hor.
And on this day also died Mark, Emperor of Rome. This saint reigned in his virginity for
five years, and he ruled his people justly and righteously. And then when the people
forced him to marry a wife, he went by night into the church, and stood up before the
picture of the holy two-fold Virgin Mary, and he said unto her, “O my Lady, guide thou
me in the way wherein I should walk”; and she said unto him, “Go in peace, and God shall
be with thee.” And then, without a ship he passed over the sea of Jericho and came to
Debre Tormak in a desert region, and he lived there fighting devils for sixty years; and
when he died the angels buried him with praise. Salutation to Mark.
And on this day also died Theodore, the son of David, King of Ethiopia. This saint was brought up
from his earliest years with wisdom and admonition, and he learned all the Books of the Church,
and then he practised horsemanship and shooting with the bow until he was a strong and full-grown
man. From his youth up he was bound with the love of God and he used to give away all his
possessions to the poor and the beggars; and he used to visit the churches. He fought the spiritual
fight with fasting and prayer, he married only one wife, and he neither oppressed nor defrauded any
man. When he meditated going to Jerusalem, he consulted Abba Mark, and he said unto him, “It is
not thy portion”; now he knew this by the Holy Spirit. When he was dead, and they were taking
him [to the tomb] in a month of winter, the waters of a full river were divided on this side and on
that, and where they buried him a fountain of water appeared, and it existeth to this day. Salutation
to Theodore, the son of the Lion.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

599

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Senne 30
(July 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day was born Saint John the Baptist, than whom none born of women was greater.
He it was whom our Lord Jesus Christ praised, and he it was who bowed to Him when He
was in his mother’s womb, and it was meet for him to lay his hand upon the head of the
Son of the Living God. And the Holy Gospel saith: When the days of the conception of
Elisabeth were fulfilled that she should bring forth, she brought forth a son. And her
neighbors and kinsfolk heard that God had multiplied His mercy to her and they rejoiced
with her. And when the eighth day came one arrived to circumcise the boy, and he called
him by the name of his father Zacharias, but his mother said, “Nay, he shall be called
‘John.’” And they said unto her, “None of thy kinsfolk is called by this name,” and they
made a sign to his father and said unto him, “What dost thou wish him to be called?” And
he wrote, saying, “His name is John,” and his father’s mouth was opened, and his tongue
was loosed from his dumbness. And he praised God, and prophesied concerning his son,
that he should be called the “Prophet of the Highest,” and that “he should go before the
face of the Lord to prepare His way.” And when his second year was completed, the
stargazers came, and Herod killed the children; and one informed Herod about this
prophet, and his soldiers searched for him to kill him. And his father Zacharias took him,
and carried him on his shoulders, and he asked the soldiers to come with him into the place
where he lived. Then he took John, and the soldiers came with him, until he went into the
sanctuary, and then he laid him upon the horn of the altar, and said unto them, “Take him
from here.” And the angel of God caught up the child, and carried him to a desert, the
name of which is Zipata. And when the soldiers could not find him they became very
angry, because the father and the child’s mother had made them to lose him; and they
killed Zacharias his father. And John the Baptist dwelt in the desert until God commanded
him to come to the desert of the Jordan, and to preach the baptism of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to reveal himself to the people of Israel, even as Malachi the prophet prophesied
concerning him, saying, “That preacher is an angel before the Redeemer, and is in truth the
similitude of the angels.” He was full of the Holy Spirit when he was in the womb of his
mother, and of him it was said, “he shall dwell in the desert, and he shall neither eat bread,
nor drink wine, all the days of his life.” And our Lord Jesus Christ was a witness
concerning him, and he knew not a woman, and he committed no sin, neither great nor
little. And he preached our Lord Jesus Christ, and he saw the Holy Spirit descending upon
Him from heaven, and he received the crown of martyrdom, which, in truth, is
incorruptible in the kingdom of the heavens. Our Lord Jesus Christ saith, “Among those
born of the offspring of women there is none greater than John the Baptist” (Matthew xi,
II). Salutation to thy birth, O John the Baptist.
And on this day also Martha and Mary became martyrs, and Gebre Christos, the monk, is
commemorated.
And on this day also died Abba Geran, the fighter, who dwelt in an island of India. This
saint feared God greatly, and he loved giving alms and prayer, and God heard every
petition he made to Him; and by his prayers he removed from that country pestilence, and
scarcity, and captivity, and the shedding of blood, and the sinking of ships; whatsoever he
asked from Him he obtained. And when Satan saw that heavenly grace was given unto
600

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him, he became jealous of him, and he came to him in the form of a beautiful woman, who
was arrayed in the apparel of kings, and was bedecked with precious stones and pearls;
now she was walking by herself. And when he saw her he went to her and asked her
concerning her business, and she said unto him, “I am the daughter of Serseban, the king.
My sister having committed folly with her father’s slaves, my father wished to kill all of
us. Because of this I came forth by night and arrived in this desert, and praise be unto God
that a holy man hath found me, that is to say, thyself.” And he said unto her, “Get thee
into a rock so that those who come unto me may not see thee.” And during the night she
came to him, pretending that she was frightened of wild animals, and she cried out to him
to open unto her the doors of his cell. And having opened unto her she came in to him, and
slept by his side, and she embraced his body, and she spoke unto him with words of
endearment until his heart inclined to love for her. And straightway grace was taken from
him, and his eye became black, and he did not look at her again. Then having roused
himself from the drunken stupor of error, he knew at once that he had sinned, and that the
woman was one of the deceits of Satan, the accursed Adversary, by whom he had been
overcome. Then he wrote down what had befallen him, and everything which he had done
in the body, and he took one of the stones on the island, and he beat his breast therewith
continually until he died. And his soul departed to everlasting life. And then the people of
that district came, according to their wont, to be blessed by him, and when they found him
not, they went through his habitation, and found him lying prostrate; and it seemed to them
that he was sleeping, but when they tried to wake him they found that he was dead. Then
they kissed him, and prepared him for burial, and they buried him in the earth. And they
found the writing wherein he had written what had happened unto him through the
operations of Satan, and what were the reasons for his death. Salutation to Abba Geran.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

601

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE ELEVENTH MONTH
Hamle 01
(July 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy virgin Cephronia became a martyr. This fighter of the spiritual fight
gave herself to our Lord Jesus Christ. She was the sister of the abbess of a nunnery
(wherein there were fifty virgins, now the nunnery lay between two rivers) whose name
was ‘Ariana, and she brought her up in the fear of God, and taught her to read the Divine
Books. And she fought a good fight, and devoted herself to God, and she fasted for two
days at a time, and she prayed many prayers. Now this holy woman ‘Ariana was
exceedingly beautiful. When Diocletian, the infidel, commended his officers to make men
worship idols, they seized many Christians and they became martyrs. When the virgins
heard this they went forth from the nunnery and hid themselves, and there was no one left
in the nunnery except the abbess ‘Ariana, and this Saint Cephronia, and another sister.
And on the following day the envoys of the emperor came to the nunnery, and they seized
the abbess and bound her with fetters, and then searched for the other virgins. And saint
Cephronia said unto them, “Come, take me, and set free this old woman”; and they took
her, and bound her with fetters of iron, and carried her to the city; now at that time her days
were twelve years; and the abbess followed her weeping. And when they brought her to the
governor he asked her saying, “Wilt thou worship the idols?” And he promised her many
things [if she would do so]. But she refused to obey him, and she spurned his promises.
And he commanded the soldiers to beat her with rods, and they did so. And he
commanded them to rip up her clothes, and they ripped them up so that her body became
visible. And the abbess cried out at him, saying, “May God rip thee up, O wicked infidel,
even as thou wishest to put to shame this little girl.” And the governor was wroth, and he
commanded them to bind Saint Cephronia, and to torture her on the wheel and to cut her
body with iron saws; and they did this to her until all her body was sawn in pieces. And
she prayed to God, and sought for help from Him, and no injury happened to her. After
this they cut out her tongue, and smashed her teeth, and they cut off her limbs and burnt
her body with fire; and our Lord Jesus Christ raised her up without suffering. When the
governor was tired of torturing her he commanded them to cut off her head with the sword,
and then she received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And a
certain rich man, who was a believer, came and took her body, and wrapped it up in
beautiful silk wrappings, and laid it in a coffin of gold, and many signs and miracles took
place through her. Salutation to Cephronia.
And on this day also died the holy fighters Kalyos, Archbishop of Rome, and
Bartholomew, and Gebre Medhin, the monk and righteous man.
And on this day also died the saints and fighters, the two priests, who were brothers, Beyus
and Benjamin. These saints were priests in the church of the city of Tuna, in the district of
Tida, in Lower Egypt, and they were brothers. Their father was steward of the church, and
he was an excellent and meek man. His two sons were perfect in holiness, and God
wrought great signs and wonders by their hands. And they healed the sick, for they used to
wash the sick in water from the well of the church, and they were healed of their sicknesses
straightway. And at the time when death was drawing nigh to their father, the priest
602

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Benjamin was putting on the priestly vestments in order to go up into the sanctuary, to
consecrate the Offering; and one told him saying, “Thy father is nigh unto death and he is
asking for thee.” And Saint Benjamin said, “I cannot take off the priestly vestments until I
have finished the Office; if God willth me to see him before his death, [good and well,] and
if not, God’s Will be done.” And whilst he was speaking thus his father sent a messenger,
asking for him a third time. And when he had finished the Office he found that his father
was dead, and he was exceedingly sorry, because the money and the sacred possessions of
the church were deposited with him, and he did not know where his father had laid them.
And his brother Beyus counseled him to go to the desert of Scete, and to ask the holy
elders there about the sacred possessions of the church. And when Saint Benjamin had
gone to the desert of Scete, he went and held converse with Saint Abba Daniel, Abbot of
the desert of Scete, and Abba Daniel told him about everything which had happened, and
he commanded him to go to a certain righteous man, who would make him to know
everything that had happened to the property. And Benjamin went to him, and he revealed
to him where the sacred money was, and he took it away with him. And after this the saint
and his brother devoted themselves to every kind of good and noble and perfect spiritual
fight, and they became believers. In those days, what was left of the holy Body (i.e. the
sacramental bread) they laid up [in a coffer] for [use in] sickness, and when any one was
nigh to die, they gave him some of it. And Satan, in the form of a serpent, came and
moved the coffer, and made a hole in it, and went in and ate the Body which rested therein;
and the serpent was in the habit of going into that box, and eating the holy Body which was
therein. And when the saints knew this they wept, and Benjamin, who was exceedingly
sorrowful, killed the serpent; and then they took counsel together as to whether they should
eat the serpent, because the holy Body [was inside it]. And they asked God to inform them
if this was His good pleasure, and the angel of God appeared unto them, and commanded
them to eat the serpent; and they ate it. And after this they died, and God revealed their
work and their strife to a certain holy virgin, and she told the people how the saints had
lived. And they built for them a beautiful church, and many signs and miracles were made
manifest by their bodies, and these are mentioned in [the story of] their fight. Salutation to
Benjamin and to Beyus.
And on this day also [took place] the testimony of ‘Agnatyos (Ignatius), the Archbishop.
And on this day also Thomas the apostle worked a miracle for the woman who was killed
in a tavern. There was a certain young man who used to do an unseemly thing, and he took
a piece of the sacramental bread to put into his mouth; and his two hands withered, and he
was unable to put [the bread] into his mouth. And the man who saw him told the holy
apostle what had taken place, and the apostle called him. And he said unto him, “Tell me,
my son, what thou didst do. Be not ashamed, for the grace of God hath admonished thee.”
And the man bowed down at his feet, and he said unto him, “I have done an abominable
thing, though I thought I was doing a good one. I loved a certain woman who served in a
tavern, and I said unto her, ‘Remain pure, even as thou hast taught me that thou art pure.’
And when she refused I took a sword and killed her.” And the apostle said unto him,
“How couldst thou let anger make thee to commit the act of the Serpent?” And
straightway the holy apostle commanded one to bring him water, and he prayed over the
water, and said unto the man, “Dost thou believe in our Lord Jesus Christ? Wash thy
hand”; and the man washed his hand and it was healed and became as it was before. Then
the apostle said unto him, “Come, lead me to the dead body.” And the young man went
with the apostle, and brought him unto the place where he had stabbed the woman. And
603

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
when the apostle saw her he was very sorry, for she was very beautiful; and he commanded
the young man to bring her out, and to lay her on a bed, and the people did as he
commanded. And he laid his hand upon her, and prayed, and having finished his prayer he
said unto the young man, “Go and say unto her, holding her hand, ‘I with my hand killed
thee, and with my hand Christ raiseth thee, up through Faith.’” And the young man drew
nigh unto her, and he said to her, “I believe in our Lord Christ,” and as he did so he drew
the woman’s hand [to him], and she leaped up and sat down, and many people who were
there saw her. And she looked at the holy apostle, and left her bed, and bowed down at his
feet. And she took the hem of his garment, and said unto him, “Where is the other one
who was with thee, and who committed me to thee?” And the apostle said unto her,
“Where didst thou arrive? Tell me.” And she answered and said unto him, “A man who
was wholly black, and wearing foul raiment, took me and carried me into a place of
darkness, wherein there were many pits; and there was a horrible smell there. And I saw a
pit of fire, which blazed, and a wheel of fire, and souls were bound to that wheel. And I
also saw another pit of fire, which was filled with boiling filth and worms, and there were
souls, which were being rolled therein. And some were hung up by their tongues, and
some by their hair, and some by their hands, and some by their feet, and the heads of some
were under a layer of smoke and they were being smoked with sulfur. And I also saw a
place of darkness, which was very dense. And he who was guiding me said unto me,
‘These are the souls of fornicators, and calumniators, and liars, and plunderers, and
stealers, and murderers, and of those who never visited the sick, and who did not
remember the Law of God; therefore they are rewarded according to their works.’” And
the apostle said unto those men who were there, “Do ye hear what this woman saith? This
is not the only punishment which God hath in store for the wicked, but there is worse than
this. And turn ye to God, and forsake the working of sin, and the evil mind, and dwell in
Faith, and with a meek spirit and with holiness, and ye shall receive grace from Him.”
And all the people believed in God, and they collected much gold in order that he might
give alms to the poor, for the people was wont to give alms. And the fame of him arrived
in all countries and cities, and the people took up all those who were sick or diseased, and
those who were possessed of evil spirits, and those who were lunatics, and those who were
tormented as they lay on their beds, and brought them and laid them down in the place
where the apostle was. And he healed them all by the might of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Salutation to Thomas.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 02
(July 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Thaddeus the apostle, who was one of the Twelve Great Apostles.
This blessed apostle our Lord chose, and he was of the number of the Twelve Apostles.
When the Holy Spirit Paraclete had descended upon him, he departed into all the cities,
and preached the preaching of the Holy Gospel, and he turned many of the Jews and
pagans to the knowledge of their Creator, and he baptized them with Christian baptism.
One day as he was journeying in the country of Syria our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto
604

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him in the form of a young man with a goodly presence, and He said unto him, “Peace be
unto thee O My beloved Thaddeus, the apostle! Fear not, I will be with thee.” And the
apostle said unto Him, “May Thy peace be with me.” And then He gave him the salutation
of “Peace,” and went up into heaven. When the apostle drew nigh unto the city, he saw an
old man ploughing the fields, and he went to him and said unto him, “Peace be unto thee.”
And he also said unto him, “O old man, give me bread to eat”; and the old man said unto
him, “I have none here.” But stay with the oxen, and I will go and fetch some for thee to
eat.” And he said unto him, “Go in peace,” and when the old man went the apostle
remained with the oxen, [and said,] “The man hath gone to do me a kindness.” And he
rose up, and seized the plough, and he cried out to the oxen so that he might plough. And
Peter, the chief of the Apostles, sowed for him, for he was with him then, and he blessed
the seed in the Name of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ. And Thaddeus ploughed
three furrows, and the seed germinated that day, and became ears filled with wheat. When
the old man returned to the fields, and saw what the apostle had done, he fell down at his
feet and said, “Art thou God Who hath come down from heaven?” And Thaddeus said
unto him, “I am not God, but a servant of God.” And that [old] man said unto him, “In
return for the good which thou hast done for me I will follow thee whithersoever thou
goest.” And the apostle said unto him, “It is unnecessary for thee to do this, but take thine
oxen and lead them back to their master, and make known to thy wife that I am here, and
let her prepare supper in your house, that I may eat; for I was to go into this city and tarry
[there] this day for the Lord Jesus Christ hath called me.” And the man took the ears of
corn from the fields, which the apostles had sown, and he came unto the city with his
oxen. And when he came unto the city the men saw him carrying ears of corn, and they
said unto him, “Where didst thou get these ears of corn this day? Is it not the time for
sowing?” And he answered them never a word, and took back the oxen to their owner; and
he came unto his dwelling, and they made ready a good [meal] for the apostle. And the
story of the man came to the nobles of the city, and they sent to him, saying, “Where didst
thou get these ears of corn? Tell us, that thou mayest not die an evil death.” And he
answered and said unto them, “A certain man passed whilst I was ploughing”; and he told
them the whole story to the end. And the nobles said unto him, “Go and bring him to us,”
and the man said unto them, “Wait a little; he is coming to my house, and when he cometh
ye can see him.” And Satan corrupted the hearts of the nobles, and they said, “Woe be
unto us if this man be one of the Twelve Man who are magicians! Rise up, let us go out to
kill him.” And other men answered and said, “We cannot kill him, for we have heard that
Jesus their God doeth what they want; but let us take a woman, and set her naked outside
the city; and when the apostle wisheth to come into the city and seeth her, he will not
enter.” And they brought a woman who was a harlot, and stripped her naked, and set her
by the gates, and when the apostle had come to the gates of the city he saw the naked
woman, and she perceived that wickedness of her deed. And the apostle prayed and said,
“O my Lord Jesus Christ, send Michael the Archangel, and let him hang up this woman by
the hair of her head in the air whilst I enter the city”; and forthwith she was hung up by the
hair of her head, and all the nobles saw her hanging, but they could not perceive what held
her. And she cried out and said, “God will judge the nobles of the city,” but none of the
men of the city believed her, because Satan had hardened their hearts. And the apostle
prayed to God and said, “O Lord, strengthen me to fight Satan, who hath risen up against
me.” And the apostle prayed, and Michael the Archangel came down and drove away the
evil spirits, which vexed the souls of the men of the city. And the apostle went about in the
city, and preached in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the men of the city believed;
605

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and straightway they took down the woman who was hanging in the air. And after this
Thaddeus appointed bishops and priests over them, and he baptized them in the Name of
the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. And he appointed the woman who had been
suspended in the air to minister in the church, and he healed the sick, and opened the eyes
of the blind, and the dumb spoke, and the lame walked, and devils were driven out, and he
raised the dead, and at length all the people of the city believed. And Satan was wroth, and
he entered into the heart of a rich young man who loved money, and he sent him to the
apostle. And he came and bowed down before him, and said unto him, “O servant of God,
I have much money, what am I to do that I may live?” And the apostle said unto the young
man, “Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. Slay not, steal not,
and fornicate not. What thou wouldst not that men should do unto thee, that do not to
others; and sell thy possessions, and give [the price thereof] to the poor of this city.” And
when the young man heard these words, his wrath against the apostle increased, and he
seized him by the neck, wishing to kill him, but this did not take place for God
strengthened him; and his eye did not go forth from his head under the tribulation of the
choking. And the apostle said unto him, “Our Lord saith, ‘It is as easy for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle as for a rich man to go into the kingdom of heaven’” (Matthew
xix, 24). And the young man said unto him, “These words of thine are not true; a camel
cannot go through the eye of a needle.” And at that moment a man who had with him a
camel passed before him, and the apostle seized him and made him stand still. And the
apostle asked a certain tailor for a needle, and the tailor, wishing to help the apostle,
brought him a needle with a large eye. And the apostle thanked [him] and said unto him,
“Bring a needle with a small eye, so that the glory of God may be manifest in this city”;
and the tailor did as he commanded him, and brought him a needle with a small eye. And
straightway the apostle stretched out his hands and prayed to the Lord Jesus Christ, and he
said, “Come thou and thy camel into the eye of this needle”; and the man and his camel
came into the eye of the needle. And the apostle said, “Do it again so that all the people
may know”; and when the people saw this wonderful thing, they lifted up their voices and
said, “There is no god except the Lord God of Thaddeus, the Apostle.” And when the
young man saw this, he bowed down with his face to the ground, and he asked the apostle
to forgive him his sin, and to take all his possessions and distribute them among the poor.
And the apostle did as he asked him, and taught him the Law of the Faith, and he baptized
him in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and likewise all the
men of the city; and he administered unto them the Holy Mysteries, the Body of our Lord
and His precious Blood. And the apostle went forth from them, and they set him on his
way and bade him farewell in peace. After this he came to the country of Syria, and he
preached therein, and many men believed through him. And much tribulation and
punishment came upon him from the Jews and the Gentiles; and then he died in peace.
Salutation to Thaddeus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

606

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 03
(July 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Cyril, the pillar of the Faith, the lamp of the Holy Church,
the twenty-fourth Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. This saint was brought up by his
mother’s brother, Theophilus, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, his predecessor, and
he sent him to the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius, and he learned from him all divine
doctrine; in one year he learned by heart all the Holy Books. And God gave him grace and
intelligence to such a degree that when he had once read a book he knew it by heart. And
then the archbishop handed him over to the honorable father Abba Sarapamon, the bishop,
and his wisdom and knowledge increased, and he learned how to do all good and
honorable works. And when he had finished learning all the good works, Abba Sarapamon
sent him to Abba Theophilus, the archbishop, who rejoiced in him with a great joy, and
thanked God Who had given him such a son. And he gave him a place in the
archiepiscopal palace to read the Scriptures to the people at all times. And it came to pass
that when he was reading the Scriptures no man wished him to hold his peace, because of
the sweetness of his voice. When Abba Theophilus died, they made this father Abba Cyril
archbishop in his stead, and the church shone with his doctrine. And when Nestorius,
Archbishop of the city of Constantinople, denied God, a General Council of four (sic)
hundred bishops assembled because of him in the city of Ephesus, in the days of the
Emperor Theodosius. And this father was the President of the Council, and he disputed
with Nestorius, and resisted him successfully, and overcame him, and made manifest his
denial of God. And when Nestorius would not turn from [his error], Cyril cursed him, and
excommunicated him, and drove him from his throne. And this saint composed Twelve
Discourses wherein he explained the True Faith, and after them he wrote many Homilies,
and Admonitions, and “Characters,” which are in the hands of believers to the present day.
And this father affirmed that God, the Word, is One Nature, and One Being in His
Incarnation, and he cursed all those who separated Christ, or who differed from this good
opinion, and from this True Faith. And having finished his good fight, and pleased God,
he became a little sick, and died in peace after he had sat on the throne of Mark the
evangelist for two and thirty years. Salutation to Cyril.
Salutation to you, O Seraphim and Cherubim, who praise God ceaselessly.
Salutation to the Holy Angels.
And on this day also died the holy and honorable father, Abba Coelestinus, Archbishop of
the city of Rome, who was the disciple of Yonaknidos (Innocentius), the archbishop, his
predecessor. At the time of his death the archbishop commanded that this father should
succeed him as archbishop, and then he commanded him, saying, “Take good heed, O my
son, for there are ravening wolves in the city of Rome.” And when Yonakendis
(Innocentius) died, they appointed this father Coelestinus archbishop in his stead. Now
Arsonius was Emperor of the city of Rome in those days. And when Honorius died,
Julian, the infidel, reined in his stead, and Julian, the infidel, wanted to appoint Nestorius
Archbishop of Rome, and to expel this father Coelestinus, but the men of the city expelled
Nestorius; and there was in the heart of that infidel emperor great vindictiveness against
Saint Coelestinus. And the saint went forth, and departed to a monastery, which was near
607

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Pentapolis, and he dwelt therein, and God wrought many signs and miracles by his hands.
And the Emperor Julian, the infidel, went forth to war. And Raphael, the angel of God,
appeared unto Saint Coelestinus in a vision of the night, and gave him [the salutation of]
peace, and said unto him, “Rise up and depart to the city of Antioch to Saint Dimitrianus,
the Archbishop of Antioch, and abide with him, for the emperor hath decided in his heart,
if he returneth from the war, to kill thee.” And when he woke up from his dream, he went
forth from that monastery, and he had two brethren with him, and he came to the city of
Antioch. And he found Dimitrianus ill, and he told him everything, which had happened
to the emperor; and Coelestinus tarried with him in one of the monasteries of the city of
Antioch. And Saint Ignatius, and Nakendinos (Innocentius), the Archbishop of the city of
Rome, appeared before the Emperor Julian, the infidel. And with them was one who was
exceedingly awesome and terrifying, and he said unto him, “Why hast thou left the city of
these men without an archbishop? Behold, God will remove thy soul from thee, and thou
shalt die in the hands of thine enemies.” And the emperor said unto him, “O my lord, what
shall I do?” And they answered and said unto him, “Dost thou believe in the Passion of the
Son of God?” And he answered and said unto them, “I do believe.” And they answered
and said unto him, “Send and fetch our son Coelestinus, and restore him to his throne.”
When the emperor awoke from his dream he was afraid, and he wrote a letter, and sent it to
Dimitrianus, saying, “Be not angry with me on account of Coelestinus. Instruct my
messengers and cause them to come to the place where he liveth, so that they may restore
him to his office.” And when the messengers of the emperor went they found Saint
Coelestinus, and they restored him to the city of Rome with great honor, and the people
welcomed him with great joy. And in those days the emperor returned from the war
victorious, and the Church was in a state of quietness and peace. When Nestorius denied
God, and the General Council assembled [to deal] with him, Coelestinus was unable to
attend the Council, because of his illness, but he sent two priests, who carried an epistle
wherein he cursed Nerstorius, and excommunicated him. Now the emperor believed in the
words of Nestorius, and would have nominated him [archbishop], but he was afraid of the
archbishops. And when God willed to give Coelestinus rest from the labor of this world
Yonaknidos (Innocentius) and Athanasius appeared to him, and said unto him, “Direct the
people, for behold, thou shalt come to us; our Lord Jesus Christ calleth thee.” And when
he woke up the commanded the people, and said unto them, “Take good heed to
yourselves, for behold ravening wolves shall come into this city.” And having said this he
added, “Let us rise up and depart, for behold the saints are seeking for me and for two
others, and we must go out from this world.” And at that moment the two others were
Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria, and Lucius, Bishop of the city of San (Tanis); and having
said this he died in peace. Salutation to Coelestinus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

608

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 04
(July 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint John, and Saint Simon, the son of his father’s brother, from the city of
Sarmalas, became martyrs. The mother of Saint John was barren, and his father asked our
Lord Jesus Christ to give him a son, and he vowed that if He did so, he would make
himself a servant of God all the days of his life. And John the Baptist appeared unto him
in a vision, and told him that God would give him a son; and when this saint was born he
called him John. And he built first of all a church in the name of Saint John the Baptist.
And when the boy was grown up and his days were twelve years, his father gave him his
flock to tend. And John used to give his food to the shepherds every day, and also to those
who passed by on the road, and he fasted until the evening daily. And when his father
heard this he went to him in the fields so that he might know if what people had told him
about him [was true], and the young man Saint John was afraid lest his father should beat
him, and he wanted to flee. And his father said unto him, “Show me thy food [for] this
day”; and John answered and said unto him, “Go inside that thou mayest see it.” And
when his father went inside, and [looked at] the place where things were put, he saw that it
was full of hot bread, and he marveled exceedingly and told his mother what had happened
to their son. And from that hour they knew that grace was on their son, and they no longer
allowed him to tend the sheep. And the saint studied and learned by heart many of the
Books of the Church. And his parents asked him to let them arrange a marriage for him,
but he did not wish this. And when his days were eighteen years, he was made a priest,
and Simon, the son of his father’s brother, left the sheep and became his disciple, and he it
was who described his miracles. Now God made manifest through him great miracles, and
the people used to bring unto him those who were sick with every sickness whatsoever,
and he prayed over some olive oil, and anointed them therewith, and they were healed of
their sickness. And he rebuked the sick, and said unto them, “Many ills come upon you
because of your sins”; and this saint wrought so many miracles that they cannot be
counted, and among them are the following: A soldier took and carried off some barley
from a widow woman. And the widow came to the saint, and complained to him about the
soldier, and the saint cursed him, and his horse died when he had eaten the barley. On one
occasion the king’s general came to collect tribute, and he had with him a man, one of
whose eyes was blind. And that man came to Saint John, and was blessed by him, and
straightway his eye that was blind was opened, and he saw well with it. And this holy man
could see by the Holy Spirit the deeds of all men, and their sins were revealed to him, and
he rebuked them for their sins. And the report of this saint was heard of by a king whose
name was Marianus, who had an only daughter, and a serpent entered her belly, and grew
up therein, and she was nigh to die; and although her father had given much money to the
physicians they were unable to cure her. And the general made known to him the history
of Saint John, and how he had opened the eye of his blind servant, and the king
commanded his soldiers to send and bring the saint. And Saint John knew by the Spirit
that the king wanted to bring him to him, and he feared the fatigue of the journey and the
sea. And straightway a cloud caught him up from the city of Sarmalas, and carried him
along until it brought him to the city of Antioch, and set him upon the king’s bed; and
when the king saw him he was troubled and was afraid. And the saint told the king,
saying, “I am that poor man for whom thou didst wish to send and bring hither.” [And the
609

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
king brought] his daughter to Saint John, and he prayed over her, and the serpent went
forth from her belly without injuring her, or causing her pain. And the king, and all the
men of the house of the king were blessed by him, and they marveled exceedingly, and
they glorified God Who gave such grace to those who love Him and who do His
commands. And the king offered him much money and gifts, but he would take nothing
whatsoever from him. And the king wished to make him dwell with him, but could not
make him do so, and he laid hold upon his girdle so that he might [not] depart, and a cloud
caught him up whilst the king was holding his girdle in his hand, and the girdle broke in
the king’s hand, and Saint John arrived in his city that night. And the king built a church
over that girdle, and it is called “the church of the girdle” to this day. When Saint John
consecrated the Offering he could distinguish between the sinners and the good, and those
who were fit to partake and those who were not. When Diocletian denied Christ, and
worshipped idols, this saint took Simon, the son of his father’s brother, and went to the city
of Alexandria, and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor. And the soldiers
tortured them severely, and after this they cut off their heads with their swords. And their
souls entered into everlasting rest, and their bodies are to this day in the city of Gamnudi,
where great miracles and healings take place through them. Salutation to John and to
Simon.
And on this day also is commemorated the great saint Abba Isaiah the anchorite, of the
desert of Scete. Salutation to Isaiah.
And on this day also died Saint Abba Gabriel, the seventy-eighth Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria. This saint had believing and blessed parents, and they walked in the way of
God, and in His commandments, and according to His good pleasure. And having
begotten him, they reared him in the fear of God. One day there came to him certain holy
monks, and among them was a righteous elder whose spiritual fight was good. And he saw
a beautiful vision, as it were many bishops surrounding the boy, and they laid their hands
upon him, and blessed him, and they all said, “So be it, so be it.” When the elder woke up
from his vision he meditated and said, “The boy shall become great.” And he said unto his
father, “Teach him well, for assuredly he shall become the head and chief of many peoples;
thou wilt not see him at all times.” And he told him what he had seen; and the father of the
boy praised God, saying, “Shall anything happen to this boy?” And when his days were
two (?) years his father died in the mercy of our Lord and God and Redeemer Jesus Christ.
Now the boy had an uncle whose name was Peter, and he was Bishop of the city of Behna,
and his spiritual fight was admirable, and he was learned in all the holy Books of God of
the New and of the Old Testaments, and he took the boy and taught him. And all those
who saw the boy marveled at the grace of God, which was upon him, and at his
understanding and knowledge, and he was made a deacon. And when his days were
twelve years he wanted to put on the garb of the ascetic life, and he renounced this fleeting
world. And the Bishop Abba Peter gave him into the hands of the blessed monk Abba
Peter the priest, and he became devoted to God, and a fighter, and a man of good piety.
And he took the boy and taught him the spiritual fight, and the Rule of the monastic life in
a few days, and signs and wonders and spiritual excellence appeared through him; and
many men loved him because of his spiritual fight, and his devotion to God, and his
humility. And after the death of his teacher, Peter the priest, he departed to the monastery
of Saint Anthony, where he lived for many years, fighting the fight with fasting, and
prayer, and vigils and unceasing prostrations; and after this he departed to the desert of
Scete, to the monastery of Abba Macarius. And he became abbot of the church of our holy
610

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Lady, the two-fold Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, in the monastery of Marmos, and he
toiled and restored the building thereof. And then he went to Jerusalem, and was blessed
in the holy places, and there he was made priest of the church of the Holy Resurrection by
the hand of the holy father Bishop Abba Michael. Thence he returned to the city of Mesr
(Cairo), and dwelt in the church of Mu’Allakah of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary, copying
the holy Books of the Holy Church. In those days the throne of Mark the evangelist
remained without an archbishop for a few days, and all the bishops and priests agreed with
one consent to make this saint archbishop. And Satan, the hater of what is good, brought
certain men who were envious of him, and they did not wish him to be appointed, and they
appointed archbishop the holy and spiritual father Abba Athanasius, who is know as “Son
of the Crown.” And good works appeared from him, and he walked uprightly without
blemish, like Abba Athanasius the apostle, and then he died. And again the bishops, and
the elders, and the people gathered together, and they set their hands to a document and
wished that Abba Gabriel should be appointed archbishop. And again the Enemy of what
is good stirred up dissension among the people, and they agreed that the name of Gabriel
and the names of others should be written on papers, and that they should be laid on the
altar, and that they should pray over them for three days, and should celebrate the Offering,
so that God should make known who was to hold this honorable position and reveal his
name. And they did thus, and they brought a little child, who brought forth the paper
whereon was the name of this father; and all the bishops assembled and made him prefect
of the church of Mu’Allakah. And again his appointment was not completed, and Abba
John, who is known as the “son of ‘Absadi,” was appointed. And at that time the church of
Egypt suffered great tribulation. When Abba John was appointed, this father Abba Gabriel
went to the monastery of Saint Abba Anthony, and he fought a great fight, and devoted
himself to fasting, and prayer, and vigils, and to prostrations by day and by night; and in
the strenuousness of his fight he was superior to many. And he lived thus one year (?).
And many of the holy monks saw beautiful visions concerning him, and some of them said
that they saw him in the city of Alexandria, dressed in archiepiscopal apparel, with many
Christians and Gentiles surrounding him. And some of them saw him in the desert of
Scete, where he was appointed head of the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius; and some of
them saw a countless number of keys handed to him. Many times when he wished to come
down from the monastery of Abba Macarius, he became sick, and was unable to come
down. And then Saint Anthony appeared unto him, in a vision, and said unto him, “I do
not wish thee to go down from the monastery except by the Will of God, and henceforward
thou shalt not go down except at His time.” And when three years were ended, a certain
holy elder of the monks of the monastery of Anthony saw the vision of a glorious angel,
who said unto him, “Three years from this time they shall take Abba Gabriel and make him
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria”; and that elder went out straightway and told Abba
Gabriel what he had seen. One day the governor of the city of Tafih came to the
monastery of Abba Anthony, and with him were the abbot, and many judges (or, officers),
and a letter from the emperor ordering them to bring Abba Gabriel quickly, and to make
him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And they took him against his will, and carried
him with great honor to the city of Alexandria, and with him were the father bishops; and
all the people rejoiced in him. And that day he and the bishops, and the priests and the
deacons, appointed a bishop to Jerusalem, and after this he consecrated Myron (i.e. the
holy oil) three times; and he remained thus for one year and on month. At that time Abba
Anthony appeared, and said unto him, “Behold, thy departure draweth nigh, and after one
year and a half thou shalt depart to God and shalt inherit everlasting life.” And at that time
611

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
great tribulation came upon the Christians, and this father asked God to deliver them from
it; and God accepted his petition and delivered them. Then the archbishop returned to his
throne, and Abba Gabriel hid himself in a secret place, and no man knew where he was,
except a certain believer. And through the excessive intensity of his spiritual fight, by
night and by day, his appearance became changed, and his body dried up. And after this
God revealed the matter of this father to a certain believer, who pleased God by his works,
and he became zealous for him with a divine zeal, and he brought him out of that place,
and established him in the church of the Apostles, and he lived there for many days
devoting himself to prayer and to sacred duties. And he visited the sick, and provided
them with what they needed, and he comforted the believers who came to him. One night
Abba Athanasius, the archbishop, appeared unto him plainly, and said unto him, “Be not
sad because of the labor and sorrow which hath come to thee, for God hath delivered thee
from much toil and tribulation. And behold, there must come upon thee a sickness, so that
God may perfect thy patient endurance; rejoice, however, for thou hast received the grace
of God, which is great, and thou shalt receive everlasting life, and joy which is unending.”
And straightway a severe sickness seized him, and he continued to be sick, and he was
frightened and disturbed about the departure of his soul from his body, and about his
standing before God. And there was before his face a picture of our holy Lady, the Virgin
Mary, and to this he prayed continually; and at that time God Most High appeared unto
him with a shining face, and comforted him, and strengthened him, and said unto him,
“Fear not, but rejoice, for thou hast received the grace of the kingdom of the heavens. At
the end of three days thou shalt depart from this fleeting world”; and after three days he
died in peace, and was buried in the church of Saint Mercurius with great honor.
Salutation to Gabriel the Archbishop.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 05
(July 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the martyrdom of the two great apostles, the chiefs of the apostles,
Peter and Paul. Peter was from Bethsaida, and he was a fisherman. Our Lord chose him
on the second day following that whereon He was baptized, and He chose Andrew his
brother before him. And having chosen Saint Peter, He made him chief of the apostles,
and he continued to minister to our Redeemer until the time of His death and Passion. And
in him there were faith, and zeal, and love for God, and because of this our Lord made him
the chief of the apostles. Now the apostles were divided about the matter of our Redeemer,
and some of them said that He was Elias, and some that He was Jeremiah, or one of the
other prophets, and he confessed before them all, saying, “Thou art Christ, the Son of the
Living God.” Thereupon our Lord proclaimed him blessed, and He made him the Rock of
the Church, and gave him the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. After this he received the
grace of the Holy Spirit Paraclete, and he went in among the rational wolves of this world,
and preached among them in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who was crucified, and
he converted a countless number of the people, and brought them into the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and God wrought great and innumerable signs and wonders by his hands.
612

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And he wrote two Epistles and sent them to the believers, and he spoke to Mark and
translated for him the Gospel, which is known as his. Then he came into the city of Rome,
and he went up into the great theatre wherein all the nobles were gathered together, and he
cried out with a loud voice, saying, “Blessed are the merciful, for one shall have mercy on
them,” and what followeth (Matthew 5). And when the four stone pillars, which formed
the four corners of the tribune, heard his words, they said “Amen”; and the multitudes
heard this voice. And there was a certain man in whom a Satan had lived for seventy
years, and the Satan cast him down at that moment, and went forth from him, because of
his hearing the voice from the pillars of stone. And when the nobles heard that voice they
feared with a great fear, and they came to their dwelling places wondering in their minds.
And one of the nobles whose name was Caustus came to a woman whose name was
‘Akrosya, and told her what had happened, and how Peter had taught concerning the
forsaking of this world, and [on showing] mercy to the poor. And when this woman heard
his voice, she woke up in her heart, and said, “This is a hard matter.” And then they
promised each other that they would do everything, which Saint Peter taught, and they
distributed all their riches among the poor and destitute folk. And after those days the
emperor sent to Caustus, and told him to come and consult with him concerning an
imperial matter. And when Caustus heard this he was sorry, because he had no money to
give to the emperor, and because he had no money for the necessary expenses of the
journey. And he took counsel with his wife, [saying,] “He maketh a pretence to me with
many words.” And his wife said unto him, “Go, only the God of Saint Peter can make
[matters] good for thee”; and he came to the emperor who received him with great joy.
And after a year he returned to his house, and behold, his two sons were dead; and his wife
was afraid to tell him the truth. And she made a pretence to him, with much speaking, but
at length she told him, and on hearing it he sorrowed. And she also said unto him, “O my
lord, let us pray to God,” and they prayed to God with a whole heart and there came a
voice which said, “O Caustus, O wife of Caustus, because ye have received the words of
Peter, My disciple, I will give you back your sons alive”; and straightway their sons rose
from the dead, and all those who heard [of this] glorified God. Now one of those who rose
was Clement, who became a disciple of this apostle. And Saint Peter told him all the
mysteries which he had seen, and how he had seen our Lord Jesus Christ going up into
heaven in the flesh, and he delivered to him the secret books which it is not meet that men
should see; and this Clement he made a bishop, and his brother he made a deacon. And
moreover, Saint Peter saw a great and honorable similitude of the Lady of us all, Mary, the
Pure, the God-bearer. He saw a cloud, which was like unto a bow, and in the cloud, which
appeared upon it a tabernacle of light, and in the innermost part thereof sat, in the flesh, our
holy Lady, the two-fold Virgin Mary, the mother of our Lord in the flesh. And angels
surrounded her, having swords and spears of fire in their hands, and they said, “O blessed
woman, thou art the vineyard, the beautiful one wherefrom grew the grapes of salvation.
Blessed art thou, O Upper Chamber, for thou didst carry in thy womb the Lamb of God,
and the Lord of lords. Rejoice, O Mother of light, Mother of mercy. Rejoice, O Throne of
salvation, on whom sat the God of gods. Rejoice, O Lady of all men.” And when the
angels had finished saluting her, our Lord Jesus Christ appeared, and spoke with her, and
none knew what He said unto her except Mary; and straightway there was an earthquake.
And Peter also saw mysteries, which are ineffable. And after this our Lord commanded
Peter to preach in all the cities, and he preached the preaching of the Holy Gospel. And he
went to the seacoast and came to the city of Emmaus, and Leda (Lydda). And one day
whilst he was praying in the city of Iyope (Joppa) a cloud of light enveloped him, and there
613

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
came down a sheet, which was spread out, from heaven to earth, and there were in it all
kinds of four-footed creatures, and all kinds of birds, and the similitude of swine. And a
voice cried to him from heaven, saying, “Arise, Peter kill and eat.” And he said unto Him,
“O my Lord, I cannot kill and eat what is unclean.” And again a voice called him, saying,
“What God hath cleansed let not man hold to be unclean”; and he heard this voice three
times. And each time the voice called him, a finger made a sign to him and pointed to the
beast, which was like unto a pig. And that sheet went up and was withdrawn into heaven,
and he marveled at what he had seen and he understood that [it signified] the reception of
the Gentiles who were to turn to God, and he told the holy Apostles his brethren this. And
then Saint Peter came with Saint John to the city of Antioch, as our Lord Jesus Christ had
commanded them; and Peter sent John on to the gates of the city, so that he might learn the
affairs of the city, and he asked concerning the report of Antioch. And he found outside
the city certain evil men, who spoke words of insult to him and wanted to kill him. And he
returned weeping and angry, and said unto Saint Peter, “If these common folk are as bad as
this, what shall we do before the kings of this city, and the nobles thereof? Even if we
come into it and preach in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, how shall we teach the
Faith?” And Peter said unto him, “O my beloved, be not dismayed by the words of these
men, and be not sorrowful, for He Who hath brought us from Jerusalem hither in one night,
that is to say a journey of twenty days on horses, will prosper our work.” And after that
they came into the city, and preached in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the men of
the city and the priests of the idols gathered together and beat them severely, and treated
them with ignominy, and made a mock of them, and cut off one half of the hair of their
heads, and tied them up in a tower and shut the doors on them; and they prayed to God to
help them. And our Lord Jesus Christ, Who was surrounded with the Cherubim and the
Seraphim, appeared unto them, and said unto them, “O Peter and John, fear ye not and be
not sorrowful, for I will be with you to the end of the world. And marvel not because they
have shaved the centre of your heads to make sport of you, for this shall be unto you a sign
of which to boast, and for hair of honor. And it shall be a sign of priesthood to every man
who shall follow you in the Church, and who shall offer My Body, even as ye do now. To
the priest who dieth with this crown upon his head I will give remission of sins”; and
having said this to them He went up into heaven with [great] glory. Then by the
commandment of God, Saint Paul arrived, and the saints met and talked together. And
when he saw Saint John he said unto them, “What have the men of this city done to thee?”
And Saint John said unto him, “Marvel not at me, for the chief of the Apostles also [hath]
this symbol.” And Saint Paul went to the city of Antioch, and held converse with the men
as he wished, and he pretended that he would worship the idols; and he released the saints
and took them away. And he asked them about their work, and he told them that he also
was a disciple of our Lord Christ. And they worked miracles there, and they opened the
eyes of those who had been blind from their mother’s wombs. And they also made to live
the king’s son who had been dead for three months, and whose body had decayed and
become corruption; and the king and his wife held converse with Saint Peter and believed.
And Saint Peter smote the ground and water flowed forth, and he baptized the king and all
the men of Antioch in the Name of Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and they built a
church there. And after this the believing men who were in Laodicea sent to him [a
messenger to say] that the river Kisaros had drowned many men, and flooded their
villages, and their flocks; and Peter and Paul sent him to Saint John, the beloved. And as
the saint was going along the road, he found a sheep which had become separated from its
flock, and he sent it on, saying, “Go to the river Kisaros, and say unto it, ‘The disciple of
614

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the Lord Jesus Christ hath sent me to thee, and he telleth thee to become fettered by the
word of God.” And the sheep went and did as the saint commanded it, and the river
became quiet (i.e. subsided). And when the infidels saw this miracle a countless multitude
of them believed. And then he passed on to the city of Rome, and he preached therein and
performed many signs and wonders, and he conquered Simon, the magician, who had
resisted him, and he cast him down from his rule over the souls of men. And at this
miracle many men believed, and the concubines of ‘Akrepos, the legate of the city,
believed through him, and preserved [their] purity, and many women withdrew from their
husbands. And because of this the people took counsel to kill him, and the wife of
Altabius, a friend of the king, sent a message to Saint Peter advising him to go forth from
the city of Rome, and the believing brethren likewise told him to do this, and he went forth
from the city alone, and he disguised himself so that no one might know him. And he
found our Lord coming into the city in the form in which he had first known Him, and he
bowed low before Him, and said unto Him, “Whither goest thou, [my] Lord?” And He
said unto him, “To Rome, that I may be crucified.” And Saint Peter said unto Him, “Lord,
wilt Thou be crucified a second time?” And Saint Peter remembered that He had said unto
him, “When thou art grown up, another shall gird thee and take thee whither thou wouldst
not go.” And straightway he returned to the city, and told the brethren everything, which
had taken place between our Lord Christ [and himself], and they were very sad. And when
the Emperor Nero heard the report of him, he seized him and commanded the soldiers to
crucify him. And Peter begged and entreated that they would crucify him head
downwards, saying, “My Lord Jesus Christ was crucified standing upright, and it is meet
for me to be crucified head downwards.” And when they crucified him he spoke unto the
believers the word of life, and he strengthened them in the True Faith, and after this he
delivered up his soul into the hand of God. Salutation to thee, O Peter.
And on this day also became a martyr Saint Paul, the tongue of oil, the tongue of Christ,
the tongue of sweet perfume, the lamp of Christians, the fountain of life, and the well of
wisdom, whose name being interpreted is “leader, commander, he who is praised,” or
according to another interpretation, “haven, tranquility, quietness and keeping silent.” This
Saint Paul was a Jew, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee; and his
kinsfolk called his name “Saul,” the well-known interpretation of which is, “given.” He
was a young man of handsome appearance, upright in stature, and ruddy, like the rind of a
pomegranate. His face was open, his nose was large, above his eyes was kohl, his cheeks
were [like] an open rose, and his beard was full. He was learned in the Law of the Torah,
and he was jealous for the same. And the disciples, who believed through the holy
Apostles, were exceedingly afraid of him, because he had received authority from the high
priest, who wrote to him an order, with his own hand, commanding him to bind with fetters
all those who preached in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And as Saul and those who
were with him were journeying along the road from the city of Jerusalem to the city of
Damascus, a light from heaven shone upon him, and he fell upon his face on the ground,
and he heard a voice which said unto him, “Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute Me? It is
bad for thee to kick against sharp goads.” And he said unto Him, “Who art thou, Lord?”
And He answered and said unto him, “I am that Jesus, the Nazarene, Whom thou
persecutest. But rise up, and come into the city of Damascus, and there they will tell thee
what thou must do.” And the men of Jerusalem who were with him stood up, and they
heard His voice but there was none whom they saw. And Saul rose up from the earth, and
though his eyes were open he saw nothing, and leading him they brought him to
Damascus, where he remained for three days, not eating, not drinking, and not seeing.
615

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And there was a certain man in the city of Damascus, who was one of the holy apostles and
whose name was Hananya (Ananias), and our Lord appeared unto him and said unto him,
“Hananya (Ananias),” and he said, “Behold me, my Lord.” And the Lord said unto him,
“Rise up, and go to the street which is called ‘Straight’ and enquire there in the house of
Sayda [for a man] whose name is Saul, of the city of Tarsus.” And Hananya (Ananias)
said unto Him, “My Lord, I have heard about that man and of all the evil which he hath
done to the saints of Jerusalem, and having obtained authority from the high-priest, he hath
come hither to imprison all those who bear Thy Name.” And our Lord said unto him, “I
have set him to be a chosen vessel for Me, and he shall go and carry My Name among the
peoples and kings of Israel. And I will show him how great things he must suffer for My
Name.” And Saint Hananya (Ananias) went and came to his house, and found him
praying, and he laid his hand upon him, and he prayed over him that he might see. And he
said unto him, “Saul, my brother, my Lord Jesus Christ, Who appeared unto thee on the
road as thou camest hither, hath sent me unto thee that thou mayest see, and be filled with
the Holy Spirit.” And straightway there went out of Paul’s eyes as it were scales, and he
could see, and he rose up, and was baptized, and ate food, and became strong; and he
remained in Damascus a few days with the holy apostles, and preached in their
Synagogues. And he taught concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, saying, “He is the Son of
God,” and all those who heard him marveled, saying, “Is not this the man who killed those
who were called by this name in Jerusalem and here also?” And this Saint Paul the apostle
was filled with the grace of the Holy Spirit Paraclete, and he proclaimed boldly the Faith of
righteousness. And his jealously for the Law of our Lord Jesus Christ was double that
which he had had for the Law of the Torah. And he went unto all the ends of the world,
and preached the Name of our Lord Who was crucified, and a multitude of people who
could not be numbered believed through him. And great tribulation came [upon him], and
many beatings. And the Jews shut him up in prison, and bound him with fetters, and sunk
him in the sea, and took him into deserts, and tortured him with every king of torture. And
behold, it is written in his Epistles, and in the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, saying,
“The Holy Spirit separated Saul and Barnabas for the work which He required of them”
And for this reason they went into the land of the Greeks and performed many miracles,
some of them took place when they went round the island of Kuela. And they came to a
city, the name of which is Yafus (Paphos), and they found a certain Jewish magician
whose name was Elymas, who withstood them, and wished to keep the deputy of the city
from them and from the Faith. And Saint Paul rebuked him and said unto him, “Behold,
the hand of God is upon thee. Thou shalt become blind, and shalt not see the sun until the
time when the appointed time shall have come”; and straightway the eyes of Elymas
clouded over, and became sightless, and he enquired for some one to lead him. And when
the governor of the city saw him, he marveled and believed in God. And then they went to
the district of Lukanya (Lycania) and Lestran (Lystra), and Darben (Derbe), and taught
there. And there was in the city of Lestran (Lystra) a certain man with twisted feet, and he
was born thus from his mother’s womb, and he had never walked; and he heard Saint Paul
speaking. And Saint Paul knew that the man had in him the faith whereby he would be
healed, and he said unto him, “In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ rise up and stand upon
thy feet”; and straightway he rose up and walked, and when the people saw him they
believed. And whilst he was there, certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium came and
stoned the blessed Saint Paul, and they dragged him outside the city, for they thought that
he was dead. And on the following day, when Saint Barnabas was near the city, he
appointed a priest to each of the churches there. And then he went to Phrygia and Galatia
616

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and on towards Tiro’ada (Troad), and they passed over into Macedonia. And they found
there a girl who was under the power of a demon, and she brought to her owners her
earnings, which were much, and she followed after them crying out and saying, “These
servants of God shall teach us the way of life”; and she pressed upon Saint Paul. And
Saint Paul turned, and rebuked the unclean spirit, which was on her, in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the girl was healed. And after this he went out to the city of Halab,
and he made to live the mother of Timothy, whose name was Badreman, who had been
dead. There the people wished him to sacrifice to the god of the city, [but he refused to do
so]. And they cast him into a furnace, and he stretched out his arms in the form of the
Cross, and the men of the city saw the sign of the Cross with their own eyes; and they
entreated him to come out, and he went forth, being injured in no wise, and they prostrated
themselves before him. And all the people believed through them, and even Anestus, the
governor of the city, believed; and the priests of the seventy idols fled and hid themselves.
And Saint Paul called the figure of gold, which was in the form of a guza, and it came and
stood up in the form of a lion in the middle of the temple. And Saint Paul said unto it,
“Where are the priests who worship thee?” And the lion answered and said unto him,
“Wait, O my lord, until I am able to tell thee where they are.” And the lion went to where
they were hidden, and brought out one of the priests, holding him by is neck, which was in
his mouth, and he dragged him along like a dead man, and cast him down among the
people; and thus he did to the seventy of them. And when the people saw [this] they
wanted to kill the priests. And Saint Paul said, “This day life and not death is seemly in
this city,” and he baptized them all. And he said unto the image of the guza, which was a
lion, “Fear not, O lion, because thou hast ministered unto me, thy existence shall be in the
desert until I want thee”; and he dwelt in the desert of the lion. And Saint Paul went ... and
came into the city. And the Jews heard of the report of him, and they gathered together
against him, and seized him, and tortured him. And they also brought two oxen, and they
lifted up the feet of Saint Paul, and tied him between two oxen, with ‘Antekos his disciple,
and they dragged them through the streets of the city, over the sharp stones, until their
blood flowed like water, and their bodies were torn and cut, and their bones were visible.
And the disciples prayed to God, and the two oxen, and the man who was driving them,
turned into stone in the midst of the city, where they stood still, and they are there until this
day. And the people having seen this told the governor, and he became wroth, and
commanded the soldiers to bring them before him, and they brought them, [the people]
stoning them as they did so. And the governor was wroth with Saint Paul, and he said unto
him, “O man, behold, I will torture thee.” And he commanded them to bring two brass
bulls, and they brought bitumen, and pitch, and sulfur, and fat and mixed them together,
and they smeared the outside and the inside of the two brass bulls therewith, and they cast
the disciples into them. Then they took them into a furnace, and they lighted a fire therein,
and kept it burning for three days and three nights. And our Lord Jesus Christ came, with
His angels, and He made the furnace to move from its place into the grounds of the offices
of the government, and the flames blew backwards, and consumed the men of the city.
And a voice from heaven called those who remained, and bade them to gather together to
the furnace (?). And the lion, which Paul had sent into the desert, came and cried out with
[his] voice, saying, “Believe ye in the Lord Jesus Christ, [the God] of Saint Paul.” And the
lion came back, and said unto Saint Paul and Sekantes, “Get forth from the fire, so that the
men of this city may not know”; and they went forth from the red-hot furnace alive, and
the hair of their heads was not singed, and there was no smell of fire upon them. And
straightway all the people cried out, saying, “We believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, the
617

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nazarene,” and Paul baptized them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. And he made Sekantes a priest, and having built there a church, he departed
to the city of Athens. Then he went to other cities with Saint Philip the apostle and
preached therein, and the elders of the city seized them, and bound them hand and foot,
and put chains about their necks, and they made iron helmets to put over their heads. And
they also made figures of the hand, with palms and fingers of iron, and they thrust them
over their hands and along their arms, until each hand and arm was covered with iron, and
then they drove nails through them. And they also made figures of the shoulders in iron,
which reached up to the neck and they drove nails into them, back and front; and they
made plates of iron to envelop their limbs and to cover their bodies in such a way that no
part of the body was visible. And they nailed plates of iron over their sides, and they made
shoes of iron for their feet, and they drove nails through their hands, and the soles of their
feet, and their thighs; and they made plates (?) in the form of a covering. And men who
prepared roots and drugs came, and brought a talent of lead, and huge vessel of brass, and
seven pound of refined fat. And they mixed with it grease, and wax, and ox-fat, and many
roots for burning in the fire, and bitumen, and pitch, and sulfur, and tar, and seven pounds
of colophony resin, and glue (?), and clematis wood (i.e. brushwood), and charcoal, and
very much wood. And they brought bitumen, which had been prepared, and melted it in
the [brass] vessel, and they daubed it on the iron plates, inside which were on the bodies of
the saints, until they took the shape of their bodies. And they poured over the iron plates,
inside which were the saints, the lead which they had melted, until it reached from their
feet to their heads. And they set them up by the side of a bushy pine tree, which was five
cubits high from the ground to the top thereof, and they lighted a fire about the apostles
with the leaves and branches of vines from which the fruit had been plucked, and the
flames rose up over their bodies. And the apostles prayed to God, and He put mercy into
the heart of one of the nobles, who said unto the soldiers. “Release them.” And when they
had released them, they removed the plates of iron form their bodies and their skin peeled
off, and came away like flakes of iron, and the blood of the apostles dripped down upon
the ground. And Satan entered into the hearts of the men of the city, and they put the
apostles back again into the fire, but an angel came down, and extinguished the fire on
them, and a bright cloud came and rained on them and enshrouded the bodies of the saints.
And when the people of this city saw this, they all believed. Now the saints were tortured
by stoning and by being shot at with arrows. [And the apostles] raised many from the
dead. And after this Saint Paul departed to another city, and preached the preaching of the
Holy Gospel. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him, and said unto him, “Peace be
unto thee, O Paul, My chosen one. Whosoever shall celebrate thy commemoration, and
call upon thy name, and build a church in thy name, and shall visit the church and pray
therein, and make votive offerings to it, and shall perform mercy on the day of thy
commemoration in any way whatsoever, all these I will establish with thee in the kingdom
of My Father, which is in the heavens. And whosoever shall build churches in thy name, I
will see that My angels have them under their protection.” And He promised him many
things, and gave him a salute with His holy mouth, and went up into heaven. And then
they journeyed about to many cities. And he came into the great city of Tarikon, and he
saw our Lady Mary, the mother of light, and she commanded him to teach in that city; and
she told him many things, and she gave him “Peace,” and went up into heaven. And then
Saint Paul came into the city of Rome, and preached therein, and many of the men thereof
believed through him, and he baptized them with holy Christian baptism; and he wrote to
them twelve Epistles, and that [to the Romans] is the first of his Epistles. And after this
618

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the Emperor Nero seized him and tortured him severely, and delivered him up that the
soldiers might cut off his head. And as he was passing along with the executioner, a
certain maiden who was a kinswoman of the Emperor Nero, and who had believed through
him on our Lord Jesus Christ, met him, and when she saw him with the executioner she
wept. And he comforted her, and said unto her, “Give me thy cloak, and I will return [it]
to thee soon”; and she gave him her cloak. And Saint Paul went with the executioner to
the place where they cut off heads, and having bowed his head to the executioner, he
covered his face with the cloak of the maiden, and the executioner cut off the holy head of
Saint Paul and left it wrapped in the cloak of the maiden. And the maiden said [to the
executioner], “Where is Paul?” And he said, “Behold, he is lying in the place where they
cut off heads, and his head is covered up in thy cloak.” And she answered and said unto
him, “Thou liest. Behold the saints Peter and Paul have this moment left me, and they
were arrayed in the apparel of kings, and they had decorated crowns on their heads, and
they gave me my cloak. And behold, this is it as thou canst see”; and she showed it to the
executioner, and to those who were with him, and they marveled thereat and believed on
our Lord Jesus Christ. And God wrought by the hands of Paul the apostle signs and
wonders which cannot be counted; and the people used to lay the sick folk in their beds by
the road on which Saint Paul passed, and when his shadow fell upon them they recovered
from their sicknesses immediately. Salutation to Paul. Salutation to Peter and Paul.
Salutation to Caustus and to ‘Akrosia. [Wanting in the Bodleian MS.]
Salutation to Agrippa, and to Anestia, and to Deweres, and to Karia, and to ‘Akrama, and
to ‘Akrabania, and to ‘Akestiana, and to the wife of Altabius of Rome. [Wanting in the
Bodleian MS.]
And on this day also are commemorated the Seventy-two martyrs (i.e. Disciples), and
Isaac who lived in the city of Gaza, and the righteous men who were in Debre Ash.
Salutation to the Seventy-two Disciples.
Salutation to Isaac.
Salutation to the Fathers of Debre Ash.
And on this day also is commemorated the festival of Sakue’el, the Archangel. Salutation
to Sakue’el.
Salutation to the sainted woman Maskal Kibra.
Salutation to Marcellus, the son of Yona, the disciple of Paul.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

619

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 06
(July 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the ascension of the body of Ezra Beher, who was also called the
“scribe of the commands of God.” This saint was of the house of Levi. And he began to
speak words of awe with the Highest, and he said, “Thou didst create the earth, and Thou
didst command the dust and it produced Adam.” And again he spoke saying how the
waters of the Flood went forth at the appointed time and destroyed everyone, and how
Noah, and Abraham, and David, and Solomon were chosen. And he mentioneth in his
Book that the soul doth not go forth from its body and wanders about for seven days, and is
then redeemed according to its work. And then he speaketh about the Day of Judgment,
how there will be neither sun nor moon nor stars, [but] the splendor of the lightning of the
glory of God. And then he saw Zion in the form of a beautiful woman, whose soul was
suffering grievously, and her garments were rent, and she was covered with ashes, and she
told him that her son had died on the day he came into his palace. And whilst he was
talking to her face lighted up greatly, and her appearance was like that of the lightning.
And he saw the place of her foundations. And he saw in the night how, as it were, and
eagle ascended from the sea, and he had twelve wings and three heads, and how the heads
went forth from his wings and how they were punished and blotted out through them. And
he prophesied concerning the birth of Christ, and he said, “A lion rose up roaring out of the
desert, and I heard him speak with the voice of the children of man, and he reviled the
eagle.” And again he prophesied concerning the birth of Christ, and said, “I saw in the
night a great wind which went forth from the sea, and it troubled all the waves thereof.
And I saw that that wind which went forth from the sea was like the figure of a man, and
he saw that the appearance thereof was like a cloud of heaven, and there was power and
many praises with him, and his position was at the right hand of the Father. And [he saw],
as it were, seven tribes gather together to him, and he set them on the other side of the
Tekaze.” And then when he hath mentioned the blotting out and destruction of the Books
of the Prophets, he saith that the offspring of the Fathers went out into the desert, and made
himself to shrink by means of fasting and prayer. And he took with him five wise men,
who were scribes, and a voice called unto him from the tree opposite, and said unto him,
“Ezra, Ezra, Ezra, open thy mouth.” And he gave him a cup full of water with which there
was, as it were, fire, and he took it and drank it, and wisdom welled up in his heart, and
understanding was weighty in his breast. And his spirit took good heed, and his mouth
was opened, and it closed not again, and the Highest gave wisdom unto these five men, and
they wrote down everything which happened, and the miracles, but they did not know what
followed each of them. And they dwelt there forty days, and he spoke by day, and did not
keep silence by night, and in those forty days nine and ninety Books were written. And
then the Highest spoke unto him and said unto him, “Observe this: give these [Books] to
the wise men of the people in whom is the lamp of light”; and wisdom sprung up and
knowledge flowed forth [like a spring]. And he did this for four years of the Sabbaths of
the years. And after the judgment (or, punishment), in the five thousand and twelfth year
of the darkness, in the third month, on the ninth day of the month, on that day they took
Ezra Beher and all those scribes who were with him. Salutation to thee Sutuel, the
remaining [one] of the Prophets.
620

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died the holy woman Saturnina. This saint was of the people of
Jerusalem, and aforetime she was a sinner. And then she repented and turned to God, with
burning of heart and bitter weeping; and she rejected the lust of the flesh and at length
became an abbess. And she excelled in performing works of ascetic virtue, and when one
looked at her behold one saw that her body had dwindled away through her excessive
spiritual fighting, and through her renunciation of food. And the nuns said unto her, “Eat a
small amount of lentils that thou mayest help thy body,” and when they set them before her
she said unto them, “O my daughters, I will not trouble myself for the sake of a few lentils,
for I should return to penitence for my former sins, and because of this I should increase
greatly my eating.” And then she died in peace. Salutation to Saturnina.
And on this day also the holy Apostle ‘Alempeyas (Olympius), who was called Paul,
became a martyr. This saint was of the number of the Seventy-Two disciples, and he
followed the Apostles and went with them to the preaching. And he carried the Epistles of
the Apostle Peter, and ministered unto him at the time of his tribulation, and he suffered
with him, and came with him into the city of Rome. And he preached the preaching of the
Holy Gospel, and he taught and converted many of the pagans to the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And when Saint Peter the apostle became a martyr, this apostle came and
took him down from the honorable Cross, and he wrapped him in fine and costly cloths
and laid him in the house of one of the believers. And certain men informed the Emperor
Nero that he was a disciple of Saint Peter, and the emperor had him brought, and he
questioned him about it, and the saint confessed that he was a disciple of Saint Peter the
apostle, and he confessed that our Lord Jesus Christ was God indeed. And Nero tortured
him severely, and beat him, and crucified him, and he burned the lower part of him as he
was hanging. And after this the emperor said unto him, “How dost thou wish to die?” so
that I may kill thee. And the saint answered and said unto him, “I wish to die for the Name
of my Lord Jesus Christ, kill me any way thou wishest, and bring me speedily to my
desire.” And Nero commanded the soldiers to beat him and to crucify him, head
downwards, like his master Saint Peter; and they did thus to him, and he received the
crown of the apostles and martyrs. Salutation to ‘Alminas (Olympius), who was called
Paul.
And on this day also are commemorated Bartholomew of Darasa, and one thousand
martyrs, and seventy little ones, and Kaladyanu (Claudian) the archbishop, the ninth from
Mark.
And on this day also the holy woman and fighter of the spiritual fight Theodosia, the
mother of ‘Abrokoronadeyos became a martyr, and two prefects, and twelve women,
became martyrs with her. And this happened because this holy woman heard that certain
men had laid information against her son ‘Abrokoronadeyos, and informed [the governor]
that he was a Christian, and the governor tortured him very severely and
‘Abrokoronadeyos was nigh to die. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him that
night, and healed him, and raised him up whole and uninjured. And when the two prefects,
and the twelve women, and his mother also, saw him, they marveled and cried out, saying,
“We believe in the God of this saint ‘Abrokoronadeyos.” And the governor commanded
the soldiers to cut off their heads with the sword, and they received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Theodosia and to the six (sic)
women, and to the two prefects.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
621

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 07
(July 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, the devoted ascetic and fighter Abba Sinoda ‘Arsematadas
(i.e. Archimandrite), that is to say, “head of the solitaries.” This saint was of the men of a
city the name of which is Sansal, which is in the neighborhood of the city of ‘Akmim in
Upper Egypt, and Saint Arsenius, who was like the angels, prophesied concerning him.
This Arsenius was going along the road on certain business of the monastery, and there
were monks with him, and he met the mother of this Saint Sinoda as she was going out to
draw water. And he went up to her, and saluted her thrice saying, “God shall bless the
good fruit of thy womb! It shall be sweet-smelling, and his name shall be fragrant like
perfumery, and his fame shall be in all countries for ever.” And when the monks saw him
they marveled, and they said unto him, “O our father, didst thou not wish [never] to see the
face of a woman at all? What hath happened to thee now?” And he said unto them, “As
God liveth, O my son, there shall go forth from this woman a grain of salt wherewith all
the world shall be salted, and [all] those who hope for the mercy of God.” And a certain
monk, who was a righteous man, and a spiritual fighter, answered and said unto Abba
Arsenius, “As God liveth, O my father, when thou didst draw nigh this woman to salute
her, I saw the angel of God, and in his hands was a sharp sword of fire which turned about
every way. And the angel said unto thee, ‘Having saluted her, peace be unto thee, O friend
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Know thou that he who shall be born of this woman shall rejoice
the hearts of all the holy elect ones; and the Son of God shall hold converse with him many
times.’” And when the seventh day of the month of Genbot arrived, this saint Abba Sinoda
was born. Now his father had flocks of sheep, and when Sinoda was grown up, he handed
them over to his son to tend; and Saint Sinoda used to give the shepherds their food. And
he would go down to the well in the cold winter season, and stand up in it, and pray from
evening until dawn, all the time. And a certain righteous old man testified concerning him,
saying, that he saw the fingers of Saint Sinoda like ten lighted lamps. And his father took
him, and carried him to Saint Abba ‘Absal his mother’s brother, that he might bless him.
And Abba ‘Absal laid [his hands] on the boy’s head, and said unto him, “My blessing, O
Sinoda, for assuredly thou shalt become the great father of many peoples”; and his father
left him with Abba ‘Absal. And one day Abba ‘Absal heard a voice from heaven, saying,
“Behold, appoint Saint Sinoda ‘Arsimatradas over all the world.” And he fought a great
spiritual fight, and devoted himself to the works of piety, with fasting and prayer, and
prostrations, and frequent and ceaseless vigils; and he became the light of all the ends of
the world. And he composed many Homilies, and Admonitions, and profitable Sayings.
One night the angel of God appeared to Abba ‘Absal, and brought him the apparel of
Elijah the prophet, and the head cloths of the Three Children, and the girdle of Saint John
the Baptist, and he said unto him, “God saith unto thee: Pray over Sinoda, and array him
in this apparel of the ascetic life.” And straightway Abba ‘Absal rose up, and prayed over
Abba Sinoda, and arrayed him in the garb of the ascetic life. And after this he fought a
great fight, and he drew up a Canon for monks, and nuns, and the laity, and women, and all
[classes of] men. And when the General Council of two hundred Bishops assembled in the
city of Ephesus, he went with father Abba Cyril, the Archbishop to the Council; and he
overcame the infidel Nestorius and anathematized him and excommunicated him. And
when they were coming back the sailors would not allow Abba Sinoda to travel in the ship
622

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
with the Archbishop, and straightway he prayed and entreated God, and a cloud took him
up. And as he was traveling on the cloud he looked down from above on Saint Abba Cyril,
who was in the ship, and he saluted him, saying, “Peace be unto thee, O my Father, and
unto those who are with thee”; and [Cyril] said unto him, “And on thee also, and on those
who are with thee [be peace]; forget me [not] in thy prayer.” And they marveled at him
exceedingly, and they glorified God Who giveth such grace unto those who fear Him. And
he came to his monastery, and joined in the midnight prayer with his sons the monks. And
out Lord Jesus Christ was wont to visit him often, and to converse with him, and he
washed the feet of our Lord revealed unto him many mysteries, and he prophesied
prophecies. And after this he grew old in his days and he lay down [sick] on the seventh
day of the month Hamle. And our Lord Jesus Christ came and sat by him and comforted
him, and Abba Sinoda said unto Him, “O my Lord and God, make Thou me as strong as I
was formerly, so that I may go to the Council, for the Archbishop hath sent [saying] that
they summon me because of the infidels, who blaspheme against the Holy Trinity and
would take from Thee Thy Godhead.” And our Lord and God and Redeemer with great
grace, and with a sweet voice, answered and said unto him, “O My chosen one Sinoda,
dost thou wish for more days? Behold, thy days are one hundred and twenty years and two
months! Thou didst put on the garb of the ascetic life when thy days were nine years, and
from the time when thou didst put on the garb of the ascetic life until today is one hundred
and eleven years and two months. The toil is sufficient for thee.” And when our Lord had
said this He went up into heaven in great glory. And when it was the seventh day of the
month Hamle, the Company of the Saints came to him, and he saw our Lord Jesus Christ.
And he said unto his sons, “Hold me, so that I may worship my Lord Jesus Christ”; and
they lifted him up and he worshipped Him. And then he said unto his sons, “I commit you
to God. Behold, the Will of God hath reached me that my soul must be separated from my
exhausted body, and I command you to submit yourselves to your father Wida, for he shall
be your shepherd after me.” And having said this our Lord Jesus Christ said unto him,
“Blessed art thou, O My chosen one Sinoda, and excellence shall be unto thee for My sake,
because thou hast performed My good pleasure all the days of thy life. And now, come
with Me so that I may make thee to rest in the joy which is for ever.” And when He had
said this unto him, Sinoda delivered up his soul into the hand of God, and he died in
peace. Salutation to Abba Sinoda, to whom was given the apparel of Elijah the prophet.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Makabis (Maccabaeus), who fought the
fight in the desert of Hur and pleased God.
And on this day also became a martyr Saint Abba Ignatius, Archbishop of the city of
Rome; he succeeded Peter in the days of the Emperor Tarabeyanos. When the emperor
heard that this father was teaching all the people, and bringing them into the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and that they were renouncing the worship of idols, he had Ignatius
brought before him and he said unto him, “Sacrifice to the gods.” And [though] he would
neither obey him, now submit to him, he promised him many things, and was not angry
with him; but Ignatius would not accept his promised gifts, and he was not afraid of his
wrath. And when there had been much speech between them, and Ignatius would not
agree with the emperor in his infidelity, straightway the emperor gave him to the lions.
And Saint Ignatius gave commands to the people, and made them strong in the True Faith.
And one of the lions drew nigh to him, and seized him by the head, and the saint delivered
up his soul into the hand of God; and after this the lion did not come near him at all. And
623

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
they carried away his body in great honor, and laid it in the good place, which God had
prepared for it. Salutation to Ignatius who inherited the throne of Peter.
Salutation to him that became a pilgrim.
Salutation to George the priest, whom the Virgin taught to pray.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 08
(July 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Besoy, possessor of a fair memorial, the star of the
desert in the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius. This saint was from the city the name of
which is Sanasa, in the country of Egypt, and he had six brethren. And his mother saw a
vision, wherein it seemed that the angel of God said unto her, “Thus saith God: Give me
one of thy seven sons to serve Me.” And she said unto him, “My lord, take whichever
pleaseth thee, for they all belong to God.” And the angel stretched out his hand and
touched the head of Saint Abba Besoy, the righteous man, and he said, “This is he whom
the Son of God hath chosen, and who shall serve his Lord well”; now Saint Abba Besoy
was thin and slight of body. And the mother of Abba Besoy said unto the angel, who had
touched his head, “O my lord, do thou take of them one who is strong to serve God.” And
the angel answered and said unto her, “This is he whom God hath chosen”; and after the
angel had said this he disappeared from her. And having grown up, Abba Besoy longed to
wear the garb of the ascetic life, and he went to the desert of Scete and became a monk
with Saint Abba Bamoy, who arrayed him in the apparel of Saint Abba John the Short.
And he fought an exceedingly great fight, and he fasted three times for forty days at a time,
and ate nothing whatsoever until the end of the forty days [on each occasion]. And he read
the Holy Books frequently, and he gave his soul to drink of the words of the Holy Spirit
continually, and he fasted and kept vigil by day and by night; and he loved the word of
God very much more than honey and sugar. And he was like unto a tree, which is planted
by a spring of running water, and our Lord Jesus Christ made Himself visible to him and
appeared unto him on many occasions. He washed His feet with water in a bowl, and
drank one half of the water, and left the other half for his disciple to drink. And after our
Lord had gone up from him into heaven, the saint said unto his disciple, “Rise up and drink
that water in the bowl.” And the disciple said within himself, “Why doth he not give me to
drink of the clean water which is in the water-pot?” And he neither rose up nor drank that
water as Besoy had commanded. And again Abba Besoy said unto his disciple, “Rise up,
O my son, and drink that water which is in the bowl.” And having urged him the disciple
rose up and went to that bowl, and he found in it no water whatsoever; and the saint
informed him how he had washed the feet of our Lord, and had drunk one half of the water
himself and left the other half for him. Now the disciple did not know that it was the water
from the feet of our Lord. And when the saint told him this, he was very sorry, and was
greatly terrified and dismayed. And the saint sent his disciple to a certain righteous man in
the city of ‘Akmim, pretending that he was mad, and that righteous man comforted him,
624

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and sent him back to his father Abba Besoy. And when his disciple became terrified a
second time he sent him again to that righteous man, who had died [meanwhile]. And
Abba Besoy said unto his disciple, “Place in his hand this staff, and say unto him, My
father telleth thee to rise up, and to hold converse with me.” And when his disciple went,
and laid the staff of Abba Besoy upon him, that righteous man rose up straightway, and
comforted him, and admonished him, saying, “Hear and obey thy father, for this terror hath
only come upon thee because thou didst transgress the word of the command of thy father,
he having spoken to thee, saying, ‘Drink that water which is in the bowl’”; and when the
righteous man had said these words he lay down again as before. One day one of the
disciples of Abba Besoy came to him and, before he went into his presence, he heard Abba
Besoy talking with another person, but when he entered into the place where the saint was
he found that there was no one with him. And he asked Abba Besoy, and said unto him,
“Who was he who was talking with thee?” And Saint Abba Besoy said unto him, “The
Emperor Constantine came unto me in the spirit this day, and he said unto me, ‘Had I
known how great was the glory which attendeth monks, I should have abandoned my
kingdom and become a monk.’ And I said unto him, ‘Thou hast set up the horn of the True
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and hath destroyed the worship of idols, and hath not our
Lord Jesus Christ given unto thee anything?’ And Constantine said unto Abba Besoy,
‘God hath given unto me many gifts, but none of them is like unto the glory which
attendeth the monks, for I have seen among them a wing of fire as they were flying into the
heavenly Jerusalem.’ And I said unto him, ‘Verily, God hath given unto them that glory
because of their great toil. Thou hast a wife, and sons, and riches, and dost gain
consolation there from, whereas the monks are poor, and hungry, and thirsty, and afflicted,
and it is for this reason that God hath given them the glory they have.’” And one day God
spoke unto Abba Besoy, saying, “I will make this desert like the habitation of doves, and I
will fill it with monks.” And the saint said unto Him, “My Lord, if there be many people,
where will they find food to eat?” And God said, “I will care for them, and will not allow
them to want anything.” And it was said concerning a certain elder monk who lived in the
desert of the city of Antinoe, and to whom many people gathered together because of their
confidence in him, that he fell into serious error, and said, “There is no Holy Spirit.” and
many men followed him. And when Abba Besoy heard this report about that desert monk,
he was very sad, and he placed three ears on his place of hearing. And he came to the
desert of Antinoe, and when he visited that desert monk he found many people with him,
and he saluted the saint and asked him about the three ears which he had fixed on his place
of hearing. And he said unto them, “I have a Holy Trinity, and everything I have is like the
Trinity.” And he said unto him, “Doth the Holy Spirit exist?” And the saint began, and
interpreted to the people the Books of the Old and the New Testaments, and he made
manifest to them that the Holy Spirit is One of the Three Holy Beings; and those people
returned to the True Faith, and that elder, who had fallen into error, and had led them into
error, also returned to the True Faith. And Abba Besoy had a disciple who was a simple
man, and when he went to sell what they had made with their hands, one of that multitude
met him, and led him so far astray from the path of righteousness that he uttered the word
of blasphemy against our Lord Jesus Christ. And when that disciple returned to Abba
Besoy, the saint saw that the grace of the Holy Spirit [which had been upon him], through
Christian baptism, was removed from him. And Abba Besoy said unto his disciple, “What
hath come to thee, O my son?” And the disciple told him the man had led him into error.
And the saint continued to pray for him for seven days, and at the end of that time the
grace of the Holy Spirit of Christian baptism, in the form of a dove, descended upon his
625

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
head, and entered his mouth. And the saint thanked our Lord Jesus Christ, and he
commanded his disciple to keep the True Faith, and to take good heed to himself that from
this time onwards he never uttered a word in simplicity without his knowledge. And when
the Barbarians came to the desert of Scete, Abba Besoy went and took up his abode in the
desert of Antinoe, and there he died. And when the time of tribulation was ended [the
monks] brought the body of Abba Besoy, and the body of Abba Bula, of the city of
Tamowa, to the monastery of Saint Abba Besoy, in the desert of Scete, and many signs and
miracles took place through his holy body; and his body is “living,” and hath not suffered
corruption until this day. And he dwelt in the desert of Scete seven and twenty years, and
he fought the fight and devoted himself to God in the desert of Antinoe for ten years, and
he lived in the world before he became a monk twenty years; and all the days of his life
were seven and fifty years. Salutation to Abba Besoy.
And on this day also ‘Aberokh and ‘Atom, his brother, became holy martyrs. These saints
were of the men of the city of Gamnudi, and their parents were believers, and God-fearing
folk, who gave much alms; the name of their father was “John,” and that of their mother
was “Mary.” When their parents died they were grown-up men, and the days of ‘Aberokh
were thirty years, and the days of ‘Atom were seven and twenty years. They were devoted
in their attendance in the church, and they were perfect in all excellences, and in the
practice of righteousness. And at the time of the persecution, when many became martyrs,
the saints rose up and departed to the city of Farima, in order to trade and gain money.
And they found there the soldiers of the king, who had with them the body of a certain
learned priest who had been martyred, and whose name was Anianus. And they gave the
soldiers much money, and they took the body from the soldiers and brought it into their
house, and they laid it in a fine stone coffer, and they hung up before it a lamp, which
burned continually; and great signs and wonders took place through it. And the saints
meditated upon the end of this fleeting world, and upon the happy life of the kingdom of
the heavens, and they agreed together and departed to the city of Alexandria, and confessed
our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor of the city of Alexandria. And he commanded
the soldiers to torture them, and to beat them, and they beat them with whips of bulls’ hide
until their blood ran down upon the ground. Then they drove long sharp iron nails into
their bodies, and lighted a fire under them, but God sent His angel who saved them from
the fire. And after this the governor commanded the soldiers to hang them up upon a high
tree, with their feet in the air and their heads towards the ground, and they hung them up
and at length their blood ran out of their nostrils and mouths; and the angel of God
descended and delivered them from crucifixion. And the governor commanded the
soldiers to shut them up in prison, and after this he sent them to the city of Farma. And
when they stood before the governor he marveled exceedingly at their strength, and at the
goodliness of their appearance, and he said unto them, “Cast incense to the gods,” but they
hearkened not to his command, and refused to do his will. And he mixed together salt, and
dust of tiles, and pepper, and vinegar and poured them into their nostrils, and they endured
patiently all this suffering. And after this they stripped them and laid them on a bed of
iron, and lighted a fire under them, and plucked out the nails of their hands and feet; and
they beat them severely with iron rods upon their mouths. Now at that time the wife of the
governor died, and the king asked them to forgive him for the torture, which he had
inflicted upon them, and to raise up for him his wife from the dead. And the saints
besought our Lord Jesus Christ, and he sent away the saints, and they departed to their city
Gamnudi. And they gave to the poor and needy what was left of their possessions, and
they gave the body of Saint Anianus to a righteous man whose name was Sarabamon, and
626

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
commanded him to keep the lamp burning continually before him as before; and then they
went into the city of Sarabamon, and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor.
And he commanded the soldiers to beat them severely, and they dragged them all round
the city, and their blood flowed upon the ground. And a certain deaf and dumb woman
came and took some of their blood, and she smeared it on her mouth and ears, and she
heard and talked straightway. And the governor commanded the soldiers to shut them up
in prison, and they did so, and when he was tired of torturing them, he commanded them to
cut off their heads, now Sarabamon was with them, and they cut off their heads and the
saints received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And Sarabamon
took the bodies of the saints, and there were with him two other men from the city of
Gamnudi, and they wrapped them up in fine linen, and in costly cloths, and they anointed
them with sweet-smelling unguents, and carried them to their city Gamnudi. And when
they came to the outer part of the city the beasts that were drawing their bodies on a wagon
stood still, and would not move, and although they beat them to make them go on they
would not move. And they heard a voice, which said, “This is the place which God hath
chosen for our bodies to rest in”; and they laid the bodies there until they had built a
church, and then they placed them inside it, together with the body of Saint Anianus, the
physician. And there they have remained until now in the city of Gamnudi, and many
signs and wonders have appeared through them. And Saint ‘Aberokh was very ruddy of
countenance, and tall of stature, and the pupils of his eyes were blue like nil. And Saint
‘Atom was tall of stature, and the color of the pupils of his eyes was like antimony, and his
beard was black. And our Lord Jesus Christ promised them in the time of their tribulation
that He would blot out the sins of everyone who should mention their names, or should
celebrate their commemoration, to the best of his ability, and that he should never see the
Judgment. Salutation to ‘Aberokh and to his brother ‘Atom.
And on this day also Saint Abba Belane, of the city of Bari, which was on the border of the
city of Saka, in Lower Egypt, became a martyr. This saint was a priest, and when he heard
of the tribulations of the believers, and the killing of the martyrs, he gave all his goods to
the poor and needy, and went to the city of Antinoe, and confessed the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ before the governor. And the governor tortured him with divers kind of
severe tortures for many days, and he delivered up his soul into the hand of God and
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to the blessed
Bulana.
And on this day also died Abba Mesael, whom Abba Kiros (Cyrus), the beggar, buried.
And this is his history: When Saint Abba Kiros (Cyrus) had by the commandment of God
gone into the mountain of Basat. He arrived in the monastery of the monks, and saluted the
church. And he saw therein a figure of our holy Lady, the two-fold Virgin, Mary, the Godbearer, and tears were flowing from her eyes. And he said unto her, “O my Lady,
remember me in thy prayer.” And the figure spoke and said unto him, “O Kiros (Cyrus),
thy path is fair, inhabit not this place. Go back to thy habitation to protect the bones of thy
father”; and when Abba Kiros (Cyrus) heard this, he made seven hundred bowings at the
feet of the figure, and he heard a voice which spoke unto him, in Hebrew, saying, “This is
enough for thee, for thou art a pilgrim; thou shalt lay up treasure for thyself in the treasury
of mercy.” And when he went out of that place, the monks saw how goodly his
countenance was, and that his whole person was pleasant, and they said among themselves,
“It would seem that this monk hath come from the country of Egypt, for his body is not
emaciated by fasting and prayer”; and they hated him exceedingly, and they brought him to
627

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
his abode. And he found there a poor beggar lying upon the ground, and he was sick with
the masfares sickness, wherewith he had been stricken many days before, and he was nigh
unto death. And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) saw Saint Michael by his head, and Saint Gabriel by
his feet, and Saint Raphael on his right hand, and Saint Sadakyal (Zadakiel) on his left, and
they were covering him with their wings, but none of the men saw them doing this with the
exception of Saint Abba Kiros (Cyrus). And the angels saluted him, and said unto him,
“Hail, strong man, who fearest not death by the slayers.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus)
marveled and said unto the holy angels, “What would ye do with me?” And they said unto
him, “There is a command laid on us by God that we protect this beggar.” And Abba
Kiros (Cyrus) said unto them, “Until when?” And they said unto him, “Until God
commandeth us to take him up.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) went back, and said unto the
monk, “How many years have thou dwelt in this place?” And the monk said unto him,
“Five and twenty years.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) said unto him, “Can it be then that the
abbot and the monks did not visit thee?” And the monk said unto him, “They did not; as
thou seest me. For fifteen years I never saw their faces, nor ate of their food nor drank of
their water.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) said unto him, “Tell me now; who was thy father,
and who was thy mother?” And he said unto him, “My father was the King of
Chalcedonia, and my mother was the daughter of Rakhrakha; I speak unto thee truly, O
Abba Kiros (Cyrus). I was dressed in gold, and silver, and fine linen in my father’s
house.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) said unto him, “Who then was it that brought thee into
this city?” And the monk said unto him, “Two men, who were like unto thee, came to my
father’s house, and they passed the night there. And at midnight a shining man came unto
me, and called me, and he said unto me, ‘Misael, Misael, Misael, at dawn rise up, and
depart with these saints. For this thing have I come, and I will be with thee if they do not
what is good.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) said unto him, “Listen, for I will comfort thee.
There is a certain monk whose name was Babnudi; he was exceedingly poor, and his place
of abode was the desert. And the Hater of good deeds (i.e. Satan) came unto him and
seduced him, and God gave the flesh of that poor man of whom I speak to the lions, and to
the birds of the heavens. Now, that man was the son of King Kefaz, who was of honorable
family, and ruled under the authority of the Emperor of Rome. And I also tell thee that
there was a certain poor man, who was the son of the Emperor of Rome, who went forth
from his father’s house suddenly, without taking anything whatsoever with him, except a
staff. And I knew that man very well. And he traveled about from one desert to another,
and from one monastery to another; whether he is dead I know not, or whether he is alive, I
know not. And there was another poor man, the son of a king, and he kept vigil by day and
by night, and dressed in sackcloth, and he ate and drank only on Sabbath days; and he
continued to practice these things, and died in honor. And the angels of light took his soul,
and placed it in the kingdom of the heavens. And now hearken, O my brother, unto what I
shall say unto thee: pretend not that thou hast been harshly entreated before God, Thy
Creator, for he whom He loveth, He chasteneth.” And the monk said unto Abba Kiros
(Cyrus), “Rightly hath it happened to me that I have been punished according to my
deserts”; and having said this he held his peace and passed that night [in silence]. And
Abba Kiros (Cyrus) prayed to God that He would visit that sick man, and straightway our
Lord Jesus Christ came, and with Him were thousands of thousands, and tens of thousands
of tens of thousands of angels, and they sang praises to Him, and glorified Him, saying,
“Hallelujah to our God. Hallelujah to the King, the Bestower of favors on the righteous.
Hallelujah to the Hope of the saints who have toiled on this earth. Let them rejoice.”
When Abba Kiros (Cyrus) saw this he bowed low upon the ground, and he said unto Him,
628

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
“O my Lord and God, what is it that hath brought Thee hither?” And our Lord said unto
him, “I came unto thee because thou didst call Me.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) said unto
Him, “Let this poor man die, for he is grievously afflicted.” And He said unto him, “Take
thee and place in his hand a flower of ‘apilyanos.” And he said unto Him, “Lay Thy hand
on the face of this poor man, so that Thy hosts of angels may see how greatly Thou hast
loved him.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) did as He commanded him, and his soul departed
quickly without pain or suffering. And our Lord took it into His hand, and kissed it, and
laid it on the chariot with Him; and He took it up towards the Ocean, and placed it in the
kingdom of heaven. And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) wept, and the matter was difficult for him,
and he went to the abbot and told him that the monk was dead. And the Abbot said unto
him, “What is that to me?” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) looked at him, and the abbot said,
“This was not a man, but Satan.” And Abba Kiros (Cyrus) asked him that he might [be
allowed] to bury his body, and grudgingly the abbot commanded seven saints [to help
him]. And they brought censers, but Abba Kiros (Cyrus) adjured them in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, saying, “Bring not your unclean censers. Leave him in his place, for
there are others who will cense him; bury ye him.” And these saints said among
themselves, “Where doth this monk come from?” And they went into the church
murmuring against him. And the four archangels rose up, and censed his body with myrrh,
and stacte, and almonds, and juniper gum, and cumin, and tefah, and honey, and the whole
place was filled with the smoke thereof. And the monks said, “Is he then acquainted with
magic? Whence hath he this incense?” Now they did not see the angels. Then they took
his body, and buried it in the tomb for pilgrims in the monastery, and a spring of clear
water burst forth, and it became a means of healing for those who were sick and suffering.
Salutation to Misael.
And on this day also became martyrs the company of Esdros (Isidore), and Peter, and his
wife and son, and nine and forty of his servants.
And on this day also Abba Bima, for the city of Behensa in Upper Egypt, became a
martyr. This saint was a rich man, and a very good one, and a lover of the poor; and he
was set over the city. And he saw our Lord Jesus Christ in a vision, and He was shining
with a light which was far brighter than that of the sun, and He embraced him and said
unto him, “Rise up, and go to the governor, and confess My Name [before him], for behold
a crown of joy is prepared for thee.” And when he awoke from his dream he rose up and
gave all his goods to the poor and needy, and then he went forth from the city of Behensa,
and confessed the Lord Jesus Christ before the governor. And when the governor knew
that he was the prefect of the city, and the kenkelawos (i.e. Chancellor), he demanded from
him the sacred moneys of the churches of his city, and said unto him, “Sacrifice to the
gods.” And the saint answered and said unto him, “Of sacred moneys there is nothing
whatsoever left, and as for the worship of unclean idols I will neither submit to thee, nor
obey them, for I worship the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, the Creator of
heaven and of earth and of everything which is in them.” And the governor was wroth
with him, and commanded the soldiers to cut out his tongue with the sword, and they did
so; but God restored to him his tongue whole and uninjured as it was at first. And then
they crushed him with iron implements, and nailed him upon a bed of iron, and lighted a
fire under him, but God delivered him from his torture, and raised him up whole and
uninjured. Then the governor sent him to the city of Alexandria, and our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared unto him and strengthened him. And the governor cast him into prison where the
saint worked great signs and wonders. Now the sister of Julius, who was from the city of
629

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
‘Akfahas, was ridden by a devil, and the saint cast out the devil from her; and the report of
the saint was heard in all the city, and many believed on our Lord Jesus Christ through him
and became martyrs. And the governor was wroth, and tortured him with divers kinds of
tortures, and [broke him] on the wheel, and they plucked out the nails of his hands and
feet, and they dragged him about in iron chains which had been made red-hot, and they
cast him into the furnace of the public baths; and after this they hung a large stone about
his neck and cast him into the river. And God caused him to be delivered from all these
tortures and raised him up sound and uninjured. And then they cast him into the fire, but
he was saved from it, and stood up and prayed. And when the governor was tired of
torturing him he sent him to Upper Egypt, where they tortured him and hung him up head
downwards. And then they cast him into a cauldron, and lighted a fire under him, and God
appeared unto him and delivered him, and promised him that He would write in the Book
of Life the name of every man who celebrated his commemoration, or who wrote the
history of his fight, or who had it read. And when the governor was tired of torturing him
he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head, and they cut it off with the sword, and the
saint received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And the servants of
Julius, who were from the city of ‘Akfahas, took the body of Abba Bima, and carried it to
his city, and laid it in a good place until the end of the days of persecution. And they built
a fine church and a monastery and laid his body therein, and many signs and miracles took
place through it. And his body healeth to this day all the sick that come to it, and salute it
in faith. Salutation to Bayma.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Kiros, who dwelt in the desert of the West,
near the Sa’id (Upper Egypt); he was the brother of Theodosius the Great. And when this
saint saw the oppression which was in the world, he abandoned all his possessions, and
went forth from his city, and our Lord Jesus Christ guided him and brought him to the
Western Desert, wherein he lived by himself for many years; and during the whole of that
period he never saw a man but only the wild beast of the desert. And there was in the
desert of Scete a certain priest whose name was Abba Bawma, and it was he who prepared
for burial the body of Saint Hilaria, the daughter of the Emperor Zeno. And that priest
said: “Whilst I was in my church by myself I heard a voice from heaven which said unto
me, ‘O Abba Bawma, rise up, and depart, and go into the Inner Desert so that thou mayest
prepare for burial the body of a certain desert priest who hath performed My good pleasure
more than many saints.’ And straightway I rose up rejoicing, and I journeyed into the
desert for three days. I arrived at a habitation, and I knocked at the door, and an elder
desert monk opened the door to me, and we saluted each other, and I asked him, saying, ‘O
my father, is there any other desert monk in this desert?’ And he said unto me, ‘Yea.’
And I said unto him, ‘How long hast thou lived in this desert, and what is thy name?’ And
he said unto me, ‘My name is Simon, and behold up to the present I have lived in this
desert for seven years.’ And I went forth from him, and I journeyed for another three days
into the desert, and I found another desert monk whose name was Abba ‘Ammon. And I
saluted him, and said unto him, “Is there another desert monk in this desert?’ And he said
unto me, ‘Yea.’ And I saluted him and I journeyed yet four days more into the desert, and
I arrived at the habitation of this Saint Kiros. And I knocked at the door of his abode, and
said, ‘Bless me, O holy father.’ And at that moment he spoke unto me saying, ‘Good is
thy coming unto me this day, O Abba Bawma, thou saint of God! Enter in peace’; and I
entered, and saluted him and was blessed by him. And I saw the grace of God in his face,
and in the hair of his head, and his beard was white as snow. And when I had sat down he
drew me to his breast, and embraced me, and he said unto me, ‘Behold, I have dwelt in this
630

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
abode for six and fifty years waiting for this hour’; and straightway he fell sick, and lay
down and was in a state of suffering during the whole night. And at the time of dawn a
great light shone in his abode, and a shining man came in with a cross of light in his
hands. And Abba Kiros sat down, and the shining man embraced him, and blessed him,
and consoled him, and gave him the salutation of peace, and disappeared from him. And I
was afraid of him, and I asked the saint, saying, ‘Who is this that is arrayed in such great
glory, and who shineth so brightly?’ And he said unto me, ‘O my son, this is our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, and He is wont to come unto me daily and
comfort me.’ And at the ninth hour of the day preceding the Sabbath, I heard a great cry,
which reached to heaven, and the mountains and the hills quaked at the cry of them. And I
said unto him, ‘O my father, what is this cry and whose are the voices which I hear?’ And
he said unto me, ‘O my son, this is the cry of the sinners who are in Sheol, to whom God
giveth rest from their punishment on the day of His holy Resurrection, from the ninth hour
of the day preceding the Sabbath until the sun setteth on the First Day of the Week; and
they praise God because it is He Who giveth them rest on the First Day of the Week.’ And
I marveled exceedingly, and I praised God because He had given them rest. Now that day
was the eighth day of the month of Hamle. And Saint Abba Kiros cried out, saying, ‘A
great pillar hath fallen this day in Upper Egypt, that is to say Sinoda, the chief of the desert
monks.’ And on that night, which was the First Day of the Week, Abba Kiros was greatly
disturbed through the severity of his sickness, and behold, a great light shone in the
dwelling, and our Lord Jesus Christ came and sat by the head of Abba Kiros. And he said
unto the Redeemer, ‘My Lord and God, bless this man, for he hath come from a far
country.’ And our Redeemer said unto me (?), ‘O Abba Bawma, My chosen one, be
strong, and fear not; My peace and My blessing shall be with thee. And now, write the
history of the strife of this Abba Kiros, whom thou hast heard and seen, and who is
renowned.’ And again our Redeemer spoke unto Abba Kiros, saying, ‘O My chosen one,
be not sorrowful, thou art going to die, but thy death is not death, but life everlasting.
Every man who shall write the history of thy strife, or shall cause it to be read, or shall
listen to it being read, or shall celebrate thy commemoration upon earth lovingly, I will
make to sit at meat with Me at the Feast of a Hundred Years on Mount Zion, and I will
number him with My saints. And whosoever giveth an offering, or alms, or lighteth a lamp
for thy name’s sake, him will I reward with manifold gifts in My kingdom. Whosoever
writeth the book of thy strife, I will destroy the register of his sins and write his name in
the Book of Life. Whosoever shall show mercy to the poor and needy on the day of thy
commemoration, which is the eighth day of the month of Hamle, I will make him to see
that which hath never appeared to the eye, and which hath never been heard of by the ear,
and which the heart of man hath never imagined. And I will bring unto them the Holy
Mysteries in the church, and I will bless them, and I will bless their house, and I will make
their children to grow up, and they shall lack nothing whatsoever of the good things of this
world. And now, O My beloved Kiros, I will make thee into the place of heavenly light, in
everlasting joy.’ And as our Redeemer was saying this, behold David the prophet came,
and he had his harp with him, and he played upon it, saying, ‘This is the day which the
Lord hath made; let us rejoice and be glad therein’ (Psalm 118:24). And our Redeemer
said unto Abba Kiros, ‘Behold David hath come, tell him what thou wishest him to sing
unto thee.’ And David said unto him, ‘On what string doth thou wish me to play, and what
style of singing (i.e. what tune) shall I employ, and what voice (i.e. tone)? Shall it be the
first, or the second, and so on up to the tenth.’ And Abba Kiros said unto him, ‘I wish to
hear [all] ten strings, and the tone of each and the sound of each.’ And David made ready
631

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
his harp, and he played it and said, ‘Honorable is the death of the righteous man before
God.’ ‘O Lord I my Thy servant and the son the Thine handmaiden’ (Psalm 116:15, 16).
And again he said, ‘I have been young, and I am old, but the righteous man that is cast
away I have never seen’ (Psalm xxxvii, 25). And David sang out loudly and he made his
voice beautiful, and he played vigorously. And behold the soul of Abba Kiros remained in
the breast of our Redeemer, and He took it, and kissed it, and gave it to Michael. And I,
Bawma, buried the body of Abba Kiros, and when I came out from his cell I saw that the
whole mountain was filled with hosts of light, and captains of the armies of the angels; and
our Redeemer laid His Cross on the cell wherein was the saint’s body, and sealed it. And
our Redeemer was in the midst of them rejoicing in the soul of Abba Kiros, and He took it
up into the kingdom which is forever. And I, Bawma, was left by myself in that place, and
I put myself into the cell of Abba Ammon. And after this I traveled for three days, and I
came to the cell of Abba Simon; and I traveled for another three days and at length I
arrived at my monastery in the desert of Scete, and I saluted all the monks, and I described
to them the strife of Saint Abba Kiros, according to what I had seen and according to what
I had heard, and according to what Abba Sinoda had prophesied concerning him. And
when the monks heard this story they marveled exceedingly, and praised God Who giveth
such grace to those who fear Him. And they wrote down the history of this Abba Kiros,
and I sent it to all the churches and monasteries; and there is hope and comfort in the
history of Abba Kiros for all who read it.” Salutation to Kiros.
And on this day also are commemorated the fifteen martyrs who suffered with Abba Nob.
[In the Bodleian MS. this paragraph is given under the ninth day.]
Salutation to Pawli, of the city of Tamwa.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 09
(July 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Simon Cleopas became a martyr. This saint was made Bishop of
Jerusalem after James, the brother of our Lord. And he converted many of the Jews to the
belief of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he performed many signs and miracles; and he healed
the sick. And Eudrias the king heard that he was separating women from their husbands,
and commanding them to be chaste, and he had him brought before him, and tortured him
severely. Now at that time his days were one hundred and twenty years. And when
Eudrias was tired of torturing him he cut off his head with the sword, and at the same time
the head of a certain virgin whose name was Theona. [In the Bodleian MS. this section is
given under the tenth day.]
Salutation to Nathaniel.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Claudianus, the ninth Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This saint sat upon the throne of Mark, the evangelist, fourteen years,
and protected his flock; and he died in peace. Salutation to Claudianus.
632

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died Abba Besneda. This righteous man fought the fight standing by
a deep well of water, and the angels used to visit him and lift him up in a chariot a space of
nine cubits; and he died in peace.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 10
(July 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Theodore, Bishop of Five Cities (Pentapolis), became a martyr. This
saint lived when Diocletian the infidel worshipped idols, and when he sent out an Edict
into all countries and commanded his officers to torture the Christians, and to destroy them
by every kind of torture. And he sent another governor, Falawes, to the city of Phrygia and
the country round about. And Theodore having come there, and seen the whole city, the
people laid information against this saint before Diocletian, and accused him of being a
teacher of the Christians. Now this took place one year after Abba Theonas made him
bishop. And the governor had the saint brought before him, and commanded him to
worship idols. And the saint answered and said unto him, “It is not seemly for us to
abandon God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, and worship idols.” And the
governor answered and said unto him, “Is there any other god besides Artemis, and Apollo,
and ‘Ardamida, and the other gods? And are not these gods?” And the saint answered and
said unto him, “These are not gods, and our Lord Jesus Christ is the Creator.” And the
governor was wroth at the firmness of his answer, and he commanded the soldiers to
torture him. And they continued to torture him for a space of forty (?) days, with beatings,
and with crucifixions, and with the wheel, and with prison; but the saint feared not the
torture nor was he obedient to the governor’s command. And straightway the governor
commanded the soldiers to cut off his head, and they cut it off with the sword, and he
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Theodore
whom they tortured for forty days.
And on this day Saint Theodore, Bishop of the city of Corinth, and three women and the
two governors, that is to say Lucianus and Dagnanius, who were torturing them, became
martyrs. And certain men having laid information before these two governors that this
saint, the Bishop of Corinth, was a Christian, the governors had him brought before them,
and they questioned him concerning his Faith, and he confessed that he was a Christian.
And they tortured him, and beat him with rods, and he stamped on the ground and kicked
the throne of the idols and overturned them. And the two governors were wroth, and they
tortured him severely, and they rubbed his wounds with hairy rags which had been dipped
in vinegar and salt, and meanwhile he cursed the idols and the governors. And the
governors commanded the soldiers and they cut out his tongue. When they had cut it out,
one of the believing women who were there took it away, and when the soldiers put the
saint in prison, he took his tongue from that woman and laid it upon his belly, and his
tongue extended itself, and entered his mouth. And a white dove came and flew round the
saint, and then a peacock flew up and alighted on the window. And the two governors saw
them and marveled, and Lucianus believed on our Lord Jesus Christ. And straightway
633

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Dagnanius was wroth, and he slew the three women who were walking behind the saint.
And when the saint delivered up his soul the dove and the peacock flew away, and
departed straightway, and Dagnanius marveled exceedingly at this. And Saint Lucianus
informed him, saying, “The Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ is the True Faith” (?)’ and
Dagnanius himself also believed on our Lord Jesus Christ. And then they went by sea
from the city of Corinth to the land of Cyprus, and there they found another governor who
was torturing the Christians. And Saint Lucianus stood up before the governor without the
knowledge of Dagnanius, and he overturned the throne of the idols, and confessed our
Lord Jesus Christ; and the soldiers cut off his head with the sword, and he received the
crown of martyrdom. And Dagnanius took him and made him ready for burial and buried
him. And after this Dagnanius stood up before the governor, and confessed our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his head was cut off with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom
in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Theodore, Bishop of Corinth, and to
Lucianus and Dagnanius.
And on this day also died the holy father and fighter Abba Helyan (or, Golyan). The name
of the father of this saint was Justus, and the name of his mother was Kalmona, and his
district (or, home) was ‘Ain Dahay; in his youth he was a worker in gold and silver, and
was praised for his handiwork. One day a woman from among the Arab handmaidens
came to him, and asked him to make for her ornaments for her ears. When he had finished
them for her, he asked for payment from her, and she bowed her head before him, and said
unto him, “If thou wantest from me what men want from women, behold me here before
thee; other money I have none.” When he heard this he said unto her, “Thou art the
daughter of the governor of the Satans; get thee gone from me and never show me thy face
again.” And then he tarried a little while in his house reminding himself about death, and
punishment, and the resurrection, and then he distributed his goods among the poor and
needy. And he made an agreement with his mother, and left her half of his money, and
having taken food sufficient for three days he departed into the desert. And when God saw
the purity of his mind, He mad to be near to him what was afar off, and he came to the Red
Sea in one day. And whilst he was sleeping, there appeared unto him three men in white
apparel, who held a cross which shone like the sun, and they woke him up and took him
with them; and when they came to a garden they gave him a staff formed of a cross
studded with gems. Whilst they were in the garden they prayed together, and when he rose
up after prostrating himself, he could not find any one of them; and he wept because of
their separation from him. And when his sojourn there had become long, he found that he
was accustomed to the solitary life, and he fed himself upon green herbs, and drank water.
When he wanted to go by night into caves and other dark places, the staff of the cross gave
him light, and brought near to him what was afar off; and his clothing was the bark of the
trees. And when Satan, the accursed, saw his spiritual fight, he went to certain evil men
and spoke unto them, saying, “There is a treasure hidden in the desert, and if ye seize the
man who guardeth it ye will find it”; and he took them and brought them to the passage
across the river. And when they had come to the river, they lost their way to the place
where they should cross over, and although they saw the river they were unable to come
there to drink, and they were exceedingly thirsty. And again Satan transformed himself
into a wild beast of terrifying aspect, and he went to Saint Helyan, and he said unto him,
“Why dost thou not show compassion on thy companions who are thirsty, and why dost
thou not give them water to drink?” And he thought that by this means they would be able
to seize him. And the saint thought God was chiding him by the mouth of a wild beast,
and he drew water for them and crossed the river, and gave them to drink. And when they
634

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
saw his wretched condition, they had pity upon him, and wanted to give him their apparel,
but he would not take it from them, and he returned to his abode. And Satan, having laid
aside his cunning form of a wild beast, again transformed himself and took the form of a
monk, and he came to the saint to lead him astray, but the saint made the sign of the Cross
over him and Satan fled away ashamed. When the time for the departure of the saint drew
nigh, the three men who had appeared unto him before came to him, and wrote his history
for him; and when he died they buried him. Salutation to Helyan.
And on this day also are commemorated Mar Matra (MarMatra), and Andrew, Bishop of
Kefala, and the consecration of a church to Sergius in Egypt.
And on this day also became martyrs Abba Esi and five and fifty men and four soldiers.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 11
(July 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint John, and Saint Simon, the son of his father’s brother, from the city of
Sarmalas, became martyrs. The mother of Saint John was barren, and his father asked our
Lord Jesus Christ to give him a son, and he vowed that if He did so, he would make
himself a servant of God all the days of his life. And John the Baptist appeared unto him
in a vision, and told him that God would give him a son; and when this saint was born he
called him John. And he built first of all a church in the name of Saint John the Baptist.
And when the boy was grown up and his days were twelve years, his father gave him his
flock to tend. And John used to give his food to the shepherds every day, and also to those
who passed by on the road, and he fasted until the evening daily. And when his father
heard this he went to him in the fields so that he might know if what people had told him
about him [was true], and the young man Saint John was afraid lest his father should beat
him, and he wanted to flee. And his father said unto him, “Show me thy food [for] this
day”; and John answered and said unto him, “Go inside that thou mayest see it.” And
when his father went inside, and [looked at] the place where things were put, he saw that it
was full of hot bread, and he marveled exceedingly and told his mother what had happened
to their son. And from that hour they knew that grace was on their son, and they no longer
allowed him to tend the sheep. And the saint studied and learned by heart many of the
Books of the Church. And his parents asked him to let them arrange a marriage for him,
but he did not wish this. And when his days were eighteen years, he was made a priest,
and Simon, the son of his father’s brother, left the sheep and became his disciple, and he it
was who described his miracles. Now God made manifest through him great miracles, and
the people used to bring unto him those who were sick with every sickness whatsoever,
and he prayed over some olive oil, and anointed them therewith, and they were healed of
their sickness. And he rebuked the sick, and said unto them, “Many ills come upon you
because of your sins”; and this saint wrought so many miracles that they cannot be
counted, and among them are the following: A soldier took and carried off some barley
from a widow woman. And the widow came to the saint, and complained to him about the
635

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
soldier, and the saint cursed him, and his horse died when he had eaten the barley. On one
occasion the king’s general came to collect tribute, and he had with him a man, one of
whose eyes was blind. And that man came to Saint John, and was blessed by him, and
straightway his eye that was blind was opened, and he saw well with it. And this holy man
could see by the Holy Spirit the deeds of all men, and their sins were revealed to him, and
he rebuked them for their sins. And the report of this saint was heard of by a king whose
name was Marianus, who had an only daughter, and a serpent entered her belly, and grew
up therein, and she was nigh to die; and although her father had given much money to the
physicians they were unable to cure her. And the general made known to him the history
of Saint John, and how he had opened the eye of his blind servant, and the king
commanded his soldiers to send and bring the saint. And Saint John knew by the Spirit
that the king wanted to bring him to him, and he feared the fatigue of the journey and the
sea. And straightway a cloud caught him up from the city of Sarmalas, and carried him
along until it brought him to the city of Antioch, and set him upon the king’s bed; and
when the king saw him he was troubled and was afraid. And the saint told the king,
saying, “I am that poor man for whom thou didst wish to send and bring hither.” [And the
king brought] his daughter to Saint John, and he prayed over her, and the serpent went
forth from her belly without injuring her, or causing her pain. And the king and all the
men of the house of the king were blessed by him, and they marveled exceedingly, and
they glorified God Who gave such grace to those who love Him and who do His
commands. And the king offered him much money and gifts, but he would take nothing
whatsoever from him. And the king wished to make him dwell with him, but could not
make him do so, and he laid hold upon his girdle so that he might [not] depart, and a cloud
caught him up whilst the king was holding his girdle in his hand, and the girdle broke in
the king’s hand, and Saint John arrived in his city that night. And the king built a church
over that girdle, and it is called “the church of the girdle” to this day. When Saint John
consecrated the Offering he could distinguish between the sinners and the good, and those
who were fit to partake and those who were not. When Diocletian denied Christ, and
worshipped idols, this saint took Simon, the son of his father’s brother, and went to the city
of Alexandria, and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor. And the soldiers
tortured them severely, and after this they cut off their heads with their swords. And their
souls entered into everlasting rest, and their bodies are to this day in the city of Gamnudi,
where great miracles and healings take place through them. Salutation to John and to
Simon.
And on this day also is commemorated the great saint Abba Isaiah the anchorite, of the
desert of Scete. Salutation to Isaiah.
And on this day also died Saint Abba Gabriel, the seventy-eighth (sic) Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This saint had believing and blessed parents, and they walked in the
way of God, and in His commandments, and according to His good pleasure. And having
begotten him, they reared him in the fear of God. One day there came to him certain holy
monks, and among them was a righteous elder whose spiritual fight was good. And he saw
a beautiful vision, as it were many bishops surrounding the boy, and they laid their hands
upon him, and blessed him, and they all said, “So be it, so be it.” When the elder woke up
from his vision he meditated and said, “The boy shall become great.” And he said unto his
father, “Teach him well, for assuredly he shall become the head and chief of many peoples;
thou wilt not see him at all times.” And he told him what he had seen; and the father of the
boy praised God, saying, “Shall anything happen to this boy?” And when his days were
636

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
two (?) years his father died in the mercy of our Lord and God and Redeemer Jesus Christ.
Now the boy had an uncle whose name was Peter, and he was Bishop of the city of Behna,
and his spiritual fight was admirable, and he was learned in all the holy Books of God of
the New and of the Old Testaments, and he took the boy and taught him. And all those
who saw the boy marveled at the grace of God, which was upon him, and at his
understanding and knowledge, and he was made a deacon. And when his days were
twelve years he wanted to put on the garb of the ascetic life, and he renounced this fleeting
world. And the Bishop Abba Peter gave him into the hands of the blessed monk Abba
Peter the priest, and he became devoted to God, and a fighter, and a man of good piety.
And he took the boy and taught him the spiritual fight, and the Rule of the monastic life in
a few days, and signs and wonders and spiritual excellence appeared through him; and
many men loved him because of his spiritual fight, and his devotion to God, and his
humility. And after the death of his teacher, Peter the priest, he departed to the monastery
of Saint Anthony, where he lived for many years, fighting the fight with fasting, and
prayer, and vigils and unceasing prostrations; and after this he departed to the desert of
Scete, to the monastery of Abba Macarius. And he became abbot of the church of our holy
Lady, the two-fold Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, in the monastery of Marmos, and he
toiled and restored the building thereof. And then he went to Jerusalem, and was blessed
in the holy places, and there he was made priest of the church of the Holy Resurrection by
the hand of the holy father Bishop Abba Michael. Thence he returned to the city of Mesr
(Cairo), and dwelt in the church of Mu’Allakah of our holy Lady the Virgin Mary, copying
the holy Books of the Holy Church. In those days the throne of Mark the evangelist
remained without an archbishop for a few days, and all the bishops and priests agreed with
one consent to make this saint archbishop. And Satan, the hater of what is good, brought
certain men who were envious of him, and they did not wish him to be appointed, and they
appointed archbishop the holy and spiritual father Abba Athanasius, who is know as “Son
of the Crown.” And good works appeared from him, and he walked uprightly without
blemish, like Abba Athanasius the apostle, and then he died. And again the bishops, and
the elders, and the people gathered together, and they set their hands to a document and
wished that Abba Gabriel should be appointed archbishop. And again the Enemy of what
is good stirred up dissension among the people, and they agreed that the name of Gabriel
and the names of others should be written on papers, and that they should be laid on the
altar, and that they should pray over them for three days, and should celebrate the Offering,
so that God should make known who was to hold this honorable position and reveal his
name. And they did thus, and they brought a little child, who brought forth the paper
whereon was the name of this father; and all the bishops assembled and made him prefect
of the church of Mu’Allakah. And again his appointment was not completed, and Abba
John, who is known as the “son of ‘Absadi,” was appointed. And at that time the church of
Egypt suffered great tribulation. When Abba John was appointed, this father Abba Gabriel
went to the monastery of Saint Abba Anthony, and he fought a great fight, and devoted
himself to fasting, and prayer, and vigils, and to prostrations by day and by night; and in
the strenuousness of his fight he was superior to many. And he lived thus one year (?).
And many of the holy monks saw beautiful visions concerning him, and some of them said
that they saw him in the city of Alexandria, dressed in archiepiscopal apparel, with many
Christians and Gentiles surrounding him. And some of them saw him in the desert of
Scete, where he was appointed head of the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius; and some of
them saw a countless number of keys handed to him. Many times when he wished to come
down from the monastery of Abba Macarius, he became sick, and was unable to come
637

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
down. And then Saint Anthony appeared unto him, in a vision, and said unto him, “I do
not wish thee to go down from the monastery except by the Will of God, and henceforward
thou shalt not go down except at His time.” And when three years were ended, a certain
holy elder of the monks of the monastery of Anthony saw the vision of a glorious angel,
who said unto him, “Three years from this time they shall take Abba Gabriel and make him
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria”; and that elder went out straightway and told Abba
Gabriel what he had seen. One day the governor of the city of Tafih came to the
monastery of Abba Anthony, and with him were the abbot, and many judges (or, officers),
and a letter from the emperor ordering them to bring Abba Gabriel quickly, and to make
him Archbishop of the city of Alexandria. And they took him against his will, and carried
him with great honor to the city of Alexandria, and with him were the father bishops; and
all the people rejoiced in him. And that day he and the bishops, and the priests and the
deacons, appointed a bishop to Jerusalem, and after this he consecrated Myron (i.e. the
holy oil) three times; and he remained thus for one year and on month. At that time Abba
Anthony appeared, and said unto him, “Behold, thy departure draweth nigh, and after one
year and a half thou shalt depart to God and shalt inherit everlasting life.” And at that time
great tribulation came upon the Christians, and this father asked God to deliver them from
it; and God accepted his petition and delivered them. Then the archbishop returned to his
throne, and Abba Gabriel hid himself in a secret place, and no man knew where he was,
except a certain believer. And through the excessive intensity of his spiritual fight, by
night and by day, his appearance became changed, and his body dried up. And after this
God revealed the matter of this father to a certain believer, who pleased God by his works,
and he became zealous for him with a divine zeal, and he brought him out of that place,
and established him in the church of the Apostles, and he lived there for many days
devoting himself to prayer and to sacred duties. And he visited the sick, and provided
them with what they needed, and he comforted the believers who came to him. One night
Abba Athanasius, the archbishop, appeared unto him plainly, and said unto him, “Be not
sad because of the labor and sorrow which hath come to thee, for God hath delivered thee
from much toil and tribulation. And behold, there must come upon thee a sickness, so that
God may perfect thy patient endurance; rejoice, however, for thou hast received the grace
of God, which is great, and thou shalt receive everlasting life, and joy which is unending.”
And straightway a severe sickness seized him, and he continued to be sick, and he was
frightened and disturbed about the departure of his soul from his body, and about his
standing before God. And there was before his face a picture of our holy Lady, the Virgin
Mary, and to this he prayed continually; and at that time God Most High appeared unto
him with a shining face, and comforted him, and strengthened him, and said unto him,
“Fear not, but rejoice, for thou hast received the grace of the kingdom of the heavens. At
the end of three days thou shalt depart from this fleeting world”; and after three days he
died in peace, and was buried in the church of Saint Mercurius with great honor.
Salutation to Gabriel the Archbishop.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

638

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 12
(July 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the commemorative festival of the glorious angel, the Archangel
Michael, because of it God sent him to the army of Sanakrem, the King of Persia, and he
slew eighteen ten-thousand thousands and fifty hundred men. And having besieged
Jerusalem, Sanakrem (Sennacherib) sent messengers to Hezekiah the king, who reviled
him and blasphemed the Lord God, and he said unto them (i.e. the Jews), “Who can deliver
you out of my hand?” And Hezekiah, the King of Judah, was sad, and he put on hair
sackcloth, and he entered the House of God, and prayed and bowed down before Him in
the sanctuary, and entreated Him to save His people, and the city of Jerusalem. And God
accepted his petition, and He sent Saint Michael the Archangel to the army of Sanakrem
(Sennacherib), King of Persia, and he performed a great miracle upon him, and delivered
Jerusalem and all the people of Judah. For this reason the Teachers of the Church have
commanded the people to celebrate the festival of Saint Michael the Archangel this day.
Salutation to Michael the Archangel.
And on this day also Saint Abba Hor became a martyr. This holy man was from the city of
Seryas, and he had a sister whose father was a worker in metals; and he determined in his
heart to become a martyr. And he went to the city of Sarma, and confessed our Lord Jesus
Christ before the governor, who tortured him severely. And after this that governor and his
wife and sons believed because they saw and heard of the miracles which God performed
by the hands of this saint, and they became martyrs by the hands of another governor. And
the governor sent Abba Hor to the city of Antinoe, and the governor of that city tortured
him with every kind of torture, and broke him on the wheel, and hung him up head
downwards, and tortured him with red-hot irons. And when he was tired of torturing him
he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head, [and they did so,] and he received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Abba Hor. Salutation to
the company of Hor, one hundred and twenty-seven men and twenty women.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 13
(July 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba Basendius, Bishop of the city of Keft (Coptos). This saint
became a monk in his early years, and he devoted himself to the ascetic life, and fought a
great fight, and learned many of the holy Books by heart, of their number being the Book
of the Psalms of David, and the Twelve Minor Prophets. And when he used to read a
prophecy of one of the prophets, the prophet who wrote it used to come and stay with him
until he had finished reading the prophecy. And it is related of him that when he lifted up
his hands whilst he was praying, his ten fingers used to shine like ten lighted lamps; and
God wrought great sings and miracles by his hands. Now he never looked upon the face of
639

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
a woman, and he bowed his head towards the ground [when he saw one]. And there was a
certain woman who had a serious sickness in her belly, and one day she lay in wait for him
by his cell, and came upon him suddenly; and he ran away and the woman ran after him.
And when she was unable to catch him, she took a handful of the dust upon which his feet
had trodden, and swallowed it, and straightway she was healed of her sickness. One day
he saw three shining men, and they gave him some keys saying, “Thou must administer the
Church of God,” and then God chose him and he was made Bishop of the city of Keft
(Coptos). And when he was consecrating the Offering, he used to see our Lord and His
angels on the altar. One day a certain priest was reciting the Liturgy before him, and when
he was in the middle of it, he spat out spittle whilst he was standing before he altar. And
when the priest had finished this father rebuked him, saying, “Art thou not afraid of God
when thou standest at the altar? Dost thou not know that the spittle which thou didst spit
out fell upon the wing of one of the Cherubim, who were standing before the altar?’ And
great trembling and dismay came upon that priest, and they carried him to his house, and
he fell sick and died. And this saint had a sweet voice, and a good delivery of speech, and
no man became wearied of his admonition or teaching. And when the time of his death
drew nigh, the saint knew about it a few days before, and he summoned his people, and he
taught them and admonished them, and strengthened them in the True Faith, and gave
them many commands; then he delivered up his soul into the hand of God. And God made
manifest many miracles from his body. And his disciple took a small piece of his grave
clothes, and it became a means of healing for every sick person who came to him in faith.
Salutation to Basendius.
And on this day became a martyr Saint Ammon, who was from the city of Tuh, on the
borders of Buna in the north of Egypt. The angel of God Saint Michael appeared to this
saint and made known to him everything that would happen to him, that is to say, that he
must go to the city of Antinoe, where they would torture him for the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And he departed to the city of Antinoe and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ
before Eugaius the governor, who at once tortured him severely with the wheel, and with
the fire, and with the red-hot iron bed, and with whippings with whips made of ox-hide,
and with the tribulation of the [furnace] of the bath; and they flayed off his scalp and laid
coals of fire on his head. And God gave him strength under all these tortures, and raised
him up sound and uninjured, and without pain. And after this our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared unto him in the form of a young man on a chariot of the spirit, and He comforted
him, and strengthened him, and promised to be with him, and He said unto him, “O My
beloved Abba Ammon, whosoever shall call upon thy name in the time of his tribulation, I
will come down and deliver him. Whosoever shall celebrate thy commemoration, or shall
write the history of thy fight, I will remember in My kingdom, and I will blot out his sins;
and I will protect thy city and thy church and thy body.” And this saint performed great
miracles whilst he was in the body. And when the soldiers cut off his head with the sword,
he received the crown of life. And Saint Julius who was there took his body, and wrapped
it in costly cloths, and sent it with two of his servants into his city; and his body is to this
day in Upper Egypt, and many miracles appear through it. Salutation to Ammon.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

640

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 14
(July 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint ‘Abrokonyos, the soldier of our Lord Jesus Christ, became a martyr.
This saint was born in the city of Jerusalem, and the name of his father was Christopher,
which is, being interpreted, “Bearer of Christ,” and he was a Christian; and the name of his
mother was Theodosia, and she was a worshipper of idols. When his father died his
mother took him, and carrying with her much money and gifts, she departed to the city of
Antioch; and she gave the money to Diocletian, and presented her son, this saint, to him,
and asked him to make him a governor; and Diocletian took the money, and made her son
governor of the city of Alexandria. And then he commanded him to torture the Christians,
and he wrote an order to do so, and placed it in his hand. And when the saint had gone a
little way from the city of Antioch, there came to him a terrifying voice from heaven,
calling him by his name, and saying unto him, “If thou doest as Diocletian commanded
thee, thou thyself shalt die an evil death, if thou darest to transgress the command which I
have given thee.” And ‘Abrokonyos said unto Him, “Who art Thou, O my Lord? I
beseech Thee to show me Thyself.” And straightway there appeared unto him a cross of
light, and he heard a voice, which said unto him, “I am Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living
God, Who was crucified in Jerusalem.” And when he heard this voice he was afraid, and
trembled exceedingly, and he turned aside to the city of Bisan; and having made a cross of
gold, they went to the city of Alexandria. And as they were going along, the pagan Balaw
and his men rose up against him, and wanted to kill him, but he resisted them strongly by
the might of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and conquered them. And his mother said
unto him, “O my son, offer up sacrifice to the gods who helped thee in the fight, and
delivered thee.” And the saint answered and said unto her, “I will sacrifice only to my
Lord Jesus Christ, Who helped me by the life-giving Cross.” And when his mother heard
these words she sent and informed the Emperor Diocletian that her son ‘Abrokonyos had
become a Christian. And Diocletian sent to the governor of Caesarea, and ordered him to
enquire concerning ‘Abrokonyos and to torture him. And when the governor had this saint
brought before him, and ‘Abrokonyos confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before him, he beat
him so severely that he well nigh died, and then he cast him into prison. And after this our
Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him that night with great light, and with Him were shining
angels, and He embraced the saint and released him from his bonds, and He touched his
body with His divine hand, and the saint was healed of all his wounds straightway. And on
the following day the governor asked for news about the saint, whether he was dead or
alive; now he thought that the saint was dead. And when he found that he was whole, and
uninjured, he had him brought to the house of idols, where he used to go and pray; and
when the saint came, and the governor saw that he was whole and uninjured, he marveled
exceedingly. And when the people who were there saw him, they marveled exceedingly,
and they all cried out, saying, “We are Christians openly, and we believe on the God of
‘Abrokonyos”; and among them were two noblemen and twelve women, and Theodosia,
[the mother] of Saint ‘Abrokonyos. And the governor commanded the soldiers to cut off
their heads with the sword, and they did so, and the saints received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens on the sixth day of the month of Hamle. Then
the governor shut the saint up in prison until he could determine what to do with him, and
the saint remained in prison for three days. Then they brought him out, and the governor
641

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
said unto him, “Behold, I have waited three days for thy heart to turn, and thy soul to learn;
offer up sacrifices to the gods.” And the saint answered and said unto him, “Nay, O
governor, my heart will not turn. Behold, I know, and am well assured, that our Lord Jesus
Christ is the Great God alone. And these idols which are made out of stone and wood by
the hand of man, are graven images which can neither injure [men] nor benefit them.”
Thereupon the governor was wroth, and he commanded the soldiers to cut his sides with
swords. And the swordsman, whose name was Archelaus, stretched out his hand to cut the
sides of the saint with his sword, whereupon his hand dried up, and he fell down and died.
And the governor was wroth, and he commanded them to throw him down on the ground,
and they threw the saint on the ground, and then they beat him severely, and gashed his
body with knives, and poured vinegar on his wounds, and dragged him by his feet to the
prison house, and cast him into it. And he remained in the prison house three days [whilst]
the governor pondered what he should do with him. And after this they took him out of
prison, and threw him into a pit, which was filled with fire; but our Lord Jesus Christ
delivered him there from, and the fire did not touch him at all. And when the governor
was tired of torturing him, he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword,
[and they did so,] and he received the crown of martyrdom and departed to joy everlasting.
Salutation to ‘Abrokonyos.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 15
(July 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Abba Ephraim, the Syrian. This saint was a man from the city of
Kawakebet, and his father was a priest of idols, and hated the worship of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And at that time Abba Ephraim departed to Saint Abba Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis,
who admonished him, and taught him, and baptized him with Christian baptism; and he
lived with him and fought a fight greater than that [usually] fought by men in his days; and
he fasted frequently and prayed without ceasing. And the grace of the Holy Spirit
descended upon him, and he disputed with the people, and overcame them in argument.
And when the Council of the father Bishops, Three Hundred and Eighteen in number,
assembled in the city of Nicea, this saint went with his teacher Abba Jacob to the Council
of the Saints, and overcame Arius the infidel. That night Abba Ephraim saw a pillar of
light standing upon the earth, and it reached up to heaven, and when he saw it he
marveled. And a voice came to him from heaven, saying, “This pillar of light which thou
seest is the blessed Basil, Bishop of the city of Caesarea”; and he longed to see him. And
Abba Ephraim departed to the city of Caesarea, and went into the church, and stood in a
corner of it. And he saw Saint Basil, as he went up to the throne to read the Holy Gospel,
and he wore priestly vestments of gold, which were of great price, and he was in doubt
about him; and God showed him a white dove on the head of this Saint Basil. And Saint
Basil knew that Abba Ephraim was standing in the corner of the church, and he sent and
called him by his name, and Ephraim went to him, and they saluted each other through an
interpreter. And Abba Ephraim asked Abba Basil that they might talk together without an
interpreter, and the grace of the Holy Spirit descended upon them, and each knew the
642

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
language of the other. And then Basil made Abba Ephraim a deacon, and after a few days
he was made a priest, and many virtues appeared in him; and he fought a great fight. And
at that time there was a certain honorable woman of high rank who was ashamed to confess
her sin openly to Saint Basil; and she wrote on paper a confession of all the sins which she
had committed from her youth up to that day; and there remained one sin only which she
did not set down in what she had written. And then she brought the paper to Saint Basil,
and she asked him before the people, saying, “I am a sinful woman. And behold, I have
written all my sins on this paper, and I ask thee to remit them so that they may be blotted
out from this paper, it remaining sealed.” And he took the paper, and prayed for her, and
the paper became blank in every place, and all her sins were blotted out with the exception
of the one sin, which was a very grievous one; and when she saw it she wept, and entreated
him to remit to her the one sin, which remained. And he said unto her, “Go thou to the
desert, to Abba Ephraim, and he shall remit to thee this one remaining sin.” And
straightway she went to Abba Ephraim, and told him what had befallen her, and he said
unto her, “Get thee quickly to Abba Basil before his departure from this world, for he is the
chief-priest, and he must remit to thee thy sin.” And the woman returned to Abba Basil,
and she found that he had died whilst they were carrying him in his bed on the heads of the
priests. And she wept and laid the paper on the body of Abba Basil, so that he might blot
out for her the sin, which remained on the paper; and the saint blotted it out by his prayer.
And Abba Ephraim performed many miracles. And in his days there appeared a certain
wicked denier [of Christ] whose name was Walda Didan, and this father disputed with
him, and overcame him; and this father composed very many Homilies, and it is found
written in the books that the number of the works which he composed by the Holy Spirit
was one thousand four hundred Homilies and Admonitions. And Abba Ephraim asked
God, the Most High, saying, “O my Lord, take from me the waves of Thy grace.” And
having finished his good fight, he departed to God, Whom he loved. Salutation to
Ephraim.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Kharayon of ‘Amsal, and Fere-Menatos,
and five and forty martyrs, and the martyrdom of Cyriacus, (as it is written in the
Synaxarium of Mesr), and Frumentius the monk and fighter, the pure man and worker of
many miracles.
And on this day also Peter and Paul performed a miracle in the city of Rome. And it came
to pass, after the departure of our holy Lady the two-fold Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, that
[the cloud] took them up and set them down in the royal palace; and when the king saw
them he was frightened and said unto them, “What are ye and what is your business?”
And they said unto him, “We are the servants of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
Who destroyeth all kingdoms, and is able to deliver those who hear Him, and to punish
those who hear Him not.” And the king said unto them, “How is it possible for me to
know whether your words are true [or not]?” And then they told him about all the signs
and wonders, which our Lord Jesus Christ had wrought. And the king said unto them, “I
have a daughter whose right eye a bird plucked out, and if ye heal her by your prayers I
will believe in your God.” And Peter and Paul said unto the king, “Bring thy daughter to
us?” And straightway he brought her in haste. And the holy apostles lifted up their hands,
and prayed much to God, and then they laid their hands upon her eyes, and healed her in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. And when the people saw this they bowed down at the
feet of the holy apostles and believed. And thence the holy apostles departed to the
country of Philippi, even as our Lord Jesus Christ commanded them. And Satan took the
643

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
form of the king of ‘Endon, and he came to Pragmos, followed by a few soldiers, and he
said unto him, “Why dost thou keep silence concerning the two magicians who, if we do
not destroy them without [mercy], will speedily corrupt the country with their magic?”
And the heart of Pragmos was persuaded, and he sent to him one thousand two hundred
horsemen to bring the holy apostles to him, and they surrounded the city, and the men of
the city were frightened, and they told the holy apostles. And the holy apostles went out of
the city and stood up before the people, and prayed to God to send them help. And
straightway the horses of the soldiers turned and faced the holy apostles, and they cried out
in a thin voice like that of one who weepeth, “Make straight your feet, and kneel down on
your knees.” And one of the horses lifted up his voice, which was like that of a man, and
said unto the soldiers, “O ye foolish soldiers of Pragmos, why do ye seek Peter and Paul,
the soldiers of Christ, and make them out to be magicians? They have only come to
destroy the soldiers, and all the work of the devil. Do ye not see them with their King
Jesus Christ, riding upon white horses, and making supplication on your behalf, that ye
may become soldiers of Christ, and that they may write your names in the Book of Life?
As for us beasts we will worship your God”; and having thus spoken the horse held his
peace. And a voice was heard which said, “O apostles, neglect ye not my new plants”; and
when all the people lifted up their eyes they saw our Lord going up into heaven in great
glory. And when the twelve hundred soldiers saw this, they believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the submitted themselves to the holy apostles. And the holy apostles
commanded them to abandon their military service, and to give back their horses to their
king, and their weapons of war, and to believe boldly on our Lord Jesus Christ. And the
soldiers went to Pragmos their king, and stood up before him, and he said unto them,
“Where are the two magicians whom I sent you to bring?” And they said unto him, “Why
dost thou seek to do evil in return for the good which they did thee in bestowing light upon
thy daughter?” And then they unloosed their breastplates and girdles, and threw them in
his face, saying, “Take thy property. We will find a better king than thyself. We believe
on the God of Peter and Paul.” When the king heard [these words] he was dismayed, and
he became furiously angry, and he commanded his soldiers to cast them into prison until
he could kill them. And then he prepared to set out himself, and he made ready his
weapons of war, and he commanded another fourteen hundred soldiers who were with him
to set out for Pilpos, and to destroy the city down to its very foundations. And Saint Peter
knows of this in his spirit, and he said unto Saint Paul, “O my brother, rise up and let us go
to King Pragmos before he cometh to destroy the city.” Then they prayed a prayer, and
mounted upon a cloud, and it [carried them away] and set them down in the royal palace.
And they stood up before Pragmos, and said unto him," Do not destroy the city, and make
us the pretext for doing so; behold, we are before thee”, and the king commanded his
soldiers to return. And he said unto the holy apostles, “Are ye magicians who have
bewitched the city?” And they said unto him, “Far be it from us [to do] this.” And the
king said unto them, “Your sins have brought this upon you.” And he commanded his
servants to make two iron helmets with iron pegs in them, and to fill them with poisons (or,
drugs), and to heat them in the fire, and to put them on the heads of the holy apostles, and
then to hang them up head downwards; and the soldiers did this to them. Then Saint Peter
prayed, and said, “O Lord my God, make Thy glory to appear on Pragmos.” And
straightway Pragmos and all his people were hung up head downwards in the air, and at
that moment Pragmos cried out, saying, “O my Lord, deliver me from this torture. Cursed
be the King of ‘Endon, for it is he who hath led me into error, and cursed be every man
who speaketh against them.” And Saint Peter said unto him, “Thou shalt not come down
644

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
from thy hanging until thou dost give the command to thy soldiers to release the soldiers
who are in prison.” And Pragmos cried out to Loy, his daughter, and commanded her to
release them, and she released them, for she was the only person who was left unhung.
And Saint Peter said unto him, “And now, thou shalt not come down from thy hanging
unless thou wilt write a statement with thine own hand, saying, ‘There is no other god
except my Lord Jesus Christ, the King of all the world, and on all the earth there is no
being so unclean as myself’; and thou shalt command it to be proclaimed in the city.” And
the king cried out, and they brought to him paper and a pen, and he wrote theses words
whilst he was hanging head downwards; and he sent the writing to the city, and the people
read it there. And straightway the holy apostles took down Pragmos and his followers.
And the king came and bowed down at the feet of the holy apostles, and said unto the,
“Forgive me, O my lords, I believe on your God.” And all the people fell down at their
feet saying the same thing, and the apostles baptized them all in the Name of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and they also baptized the soldiers, and thus they were all
united in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the apostles built for them a church, and
appointed priests and deacons from among their learned men, and they taught them the
True Faith. And they remained with them, teaching them to understand every difficult
matter, and they gave them all the Holy Scriptures whereby they might strengthen their
hearts. And they said unto them, “Be ye strong in your faith which we have taught you
until we return to you.” And after this they gave them the salutation of “Peace,” and
departed to the city of Pilpesyus. Salutation to Peter and to Paul.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 16
(July 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died John of the “Gospel of Gold.” This saint was from the city of Rome. His
father was a rich man and his name was Trabius, and the name of his mother was Bedera.
And Saint John was with a teacher learning the Holy Scriptures, and he asked his father to
make him a Gospel of gold, and he made one as his son wished; and Saint John read in it
always, and his father rejoiced when he read in it. And in those days there came a certain
monk unto them, and he dwelt with them; now he was on his way to Jerusalem. And that
monk held converse with Saint John, and he praised in his presence the garb of the
monastic life, and at length John rejected this world, which became in his sight as nothing,
and he longed for the life of the monk. And that monk went on to Jerusalem, and then
came back, and he took up his abode in the house of Trabius, according to custom. And
Saint John asked him to take him with him to his monastery, and the monk said, “I am
afraid of thy father, and I cannot possibly take thee on my own responsibility.” Then Saint
John asked him, and made him swear that he would take him, and he helped him to escape
and took him with him; and they traveled on the sea (or, river), and embarked in a ship,
and they went on until thy arrived at the monastery wherein the monk lived. And when the
abbot of the monastery saw him, he marveled at his appearance and at his manner of
speech, and John asked the abbot to array him in the garb of the monastic life. And the
abbot said unto him, “O my son, know thou that the path of the ascetic life is very
645

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
difficult.” And John bowed before him again, and asked the abbot to make him a monk.
And John having urged him, the abbot shaved his head, and arrayed him in the holy garb of
the monastic life. And John devoted himself to the ascetic life, and he fought many fights,
and he fasted very long fasts, until his body dried up, and by reason of his excessive
fasting, and prayer, and prostrations, and ceaseless vigils, his bones appeared from under
his skin. And the abbot comforted him, and said unto him, “O my son, have pity on
thyself, reduce thy toil and be kind to thyself, even as all the brethren [are to themselves].”
And when he had been fighting a great fight for seven years, he saw in a vision as if one
said unto him, “Depart to thy parents, so that thou mayest be blessed by them before thy
death.” And when this had been said unto him, he saw the vision thrice, and he informed
the abbot of what he had seen. And the abbot said unto him, “This vision is from God and
it is meet for thee to depart.” And when he went out from the monastery he found a monk
who was wearing ragged garments and he took them from him, and gave him his own
monk’s garb. When he arrived at his father’s house, he took up his abode in his father’s
courtyard, and he lived there for seven years, in a small hut, and ate the fragments from his
father’s table, which the servants threw to him. And when his mother passed by his fetid
smell, which was exceedingly nauseous, [reached her]. And when the time of his death
drew nigh, the angel of God made it known unto him, saying, “After three days thou shalt
depart from this world.” And Saint John sent and called his mother, and told her quickly
that he was her son. And when she came to him to hear his request, he made her swear that
she would bury him in that hut, and that she would not change the rags, which he was
wearing. And after this he gave her the Gospel of gold, and said unto her, “Read this book
continually and remember me.” And when his father came, she showed him the Gospel of
gold, and he recognized it as the Gospel, which he had made for his son John. And the two
of them, his father and his mother, rose up and came to Saint John, and asked him
questions about that Gospel, and about their son. And he said unto them, “Swear ye to me
that ye will not bury me in anything except the rags which I have worn as clothes in this
hut” and then, forthwith. He said unto them, “I am your son John,” and they wept with a
great weeping. And the princes of the city of Rome gathered together to them, and at the
end of three days Saint John died. And his mother brought out the splendid apparel which
she had prepared in years gone by for her own marriage, and she wrapped him up in them,
and forgot her oath. Thereupon she fell sick. And his father remembered her oath, and he
stripped off his son that rich apparel, and dressed him in his rags, and buried him in that
little hut, and from his body great healing was obtained by everyone who was sick; and
after this they built in his name a beautiful church, and laid his body in it, and many
miracles took place there. Salutation to John of the Gospel of gold.
Salutation to Sharda Hawaryat, who had the harmlessness of the dove, and the cunning of
the serpent.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

646

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 17
(July 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day, the seventeenth day of the month of Hamle, Jonah went forth from the belly of
the whale.
On is day the holy and righteous woman Euphemia became a martyr. One of the
governors of Diocletian, whose name was Barsiros, tortured this saint. He was passing
down the road, and there were with him certain holy men with iron chains round their
necks, and his soldiers were dragging them along like dogs. And when this saint saw him,
her heart waxed hot, because of her love of God, and she was sorry for the men. And she
cursed the Emperor Diocletian and his unclean idols, and she also cursed that governor,
saying, “O thou whose heart is like a stone, and who art merciless, wilt thou not have
compassion on these holy men? Art thou not afraid that their God will destroy thee?”
When Diocletian heard of this he commanded his soldiers to fetch her, and he questioned
her about her Faith, and she denied not, but confessed before him that she was a Christian.
And he tortured her severely with every king of torture, with beatings, and with fire, and
with hanging, and after this he threw her into a red-hot furnace, but no injury whatsoever
came to her through these tortures. Thereupon she stood up before all the people, and she
prayed, and made the sign of the Cross over all the people, and she delivered up her soul
into the hand of God. Salutation to Euphemia.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Bedel the martyr, and Zacharias the priest,
and Aulenius, and Marat the bishop, and Isidore, and Ayna Sahay, and Neron the martyr,
and Gida, and ‘Awa, and Aa, and also the finding of the bones of Justus, the martyr.
And on this day took place the death of the glorious and exalted father, the man of fair
remembrance, whose deeds were excellent, Abba Andreas, Archimandrite of the great city
Debre Libanos. This blessed man was reared from his childhood on the milk of wisdom,
and he grew up in knowledge, and he assumed the garb of the monastic life under the
direction of ‘Abuna Abba John Kama. And having walked well, and fought a very great
spiritual fight, he was set upon the throne of ‘Abuna Abba Takla Haymanot; and in the
number of the learned fathers he was the eighth. And when the day drew nigh wherein he
must depart from this world, at the end his death took place with violence, so that his soul
might be great before God. And many of [his] sayings are written in the book of his strife,
which is read on the seventeenth day of the month of Hamle. Salutation to Andreas.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

647

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 18
(July 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day James the apostle and martyr became Bishop of the city of Jerusalem. This
saint was the son of Joseph the carpenter, and he was the youngest of his sons; and he was
a virgin, and chaste, and was called the “brother of our Lord” because he was brought up
with our Lord when He was in the house of Joseph, even as Joseph was called his father.
And the holy apostles made him Bishop of the city of Jerusalem, and he preached and
taught in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he converted many to the True Faith,
and baptized them with Christian baptism, and God performed great signs and wonders by
his hands, among them being the following: There was a certain man from the countries,
and the apostle found him on the road and wished to go into his house, and on the road he
discovered that this man was possessed of a devil. And when the Satan saw Saint James,
the apostle, he cried out and said, “What have I to do with thee, O Apostle of Christ? Hast
thou come hither to destroy me?” And the holy apostle said unto him, “Stop thy mouth, O
thou unclean spirit, and go forth from this man”; and because of this the Satan went forth
from that man in the form of fire. When the old man saw this wonderful thing he fell
down at the feet of Saint James the Apostle and said, “I am unworthy that thou shouldst
enter my house, but tell me what I must do, so that I, and all the men of my house, may be
saved?” And the holy apostle praised [God] because of that man, and he said, “In the
Name of my Lord Jesus Christ I thank Thee, O Chief, that Thou hast made prosperous my
way.” And he turned to the man and spoke to him the words of his salvation, and he taught
him the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the old man brought him into his house, and
all the men of his house gathered together, and the apostle taught them the Faith, and he
baptized them in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost; and he made
them heirs in the Holy Mysteries, the Body of our Lord and His honorable Blood. And
when the people heard this they brought unto him every person who was sick, and he
healed them all. And he appointed over them priests and deacons, and he made the old
man their bishop; and he gave them the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; and then he went
forth to travel through the countries. And there was a certain woman who was barren, and
she asked him to entreat God on her behalf, so that He might give her a son. And he
prayed over her, and she conceived and brought forth a son, and she called his name
James. And one day a great many Jews were gathered together about him, and they asked
him to tell them about Jesus, and who He was, and they imagined that he would tell them
that Jesus was his brother. And Saint James went up upon a throne, and began to explain
to them the Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he told them that He was equal with
God the Father. When they heard this they were wroth with him, and they dragged him
down off the throne and beat him very severely. And a certain man of their number came
with a wooden bar wherewith clothes were washed, and he beat the apostle on his head,
and he delivered up his soul. And it is written concerning this saint that he never drank
wine, that he never ate any flesh whatsoever wherein was its blood, that a razor never went
up on his head, that he never washed in the [public] bath, that he never wore clothes, but
always wore a linen loin-cloth, and that he stood up so long, and made so many
prostrations, that his feet and knees, and hands became swelled. When he died they buried
him by the side of the Sanctuary. Salutation to James.
648

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also the blessed Athanasius, of the country of Clysma, became a martyr in
the days of Diocletian and Maximianus. This blessed man was a kinsman of kings, and he
was strong in the Faith of Christ. And when these wicked emperors commanded the
people to worship idols, they appointed this Athanasius to be governor of the land of
Egypt, and ordered him to destroy the churches. And when he arrived he went to the
Archbishop, Abba Peter the martyr, and received his blessing, and told him that he was a
Christian, and he rejoiced in him. When the emperor heard of this he sent an officer to
seize Athanasius, and to enquire into his doings. And when the officer came he said unto
him, “Why didst thou forsake the love of the gods?” And Athanasius said unto him,
“From my youth up I have been a lover of Christ, and I have not forsaken my Faith.” And
the officer said unto him, “If thou dost not turn from thy Faith thou wilt be tortured. Dost
thou not know that all those who transgress the command of the emperor receive severe
beatings and are tortured with cruel severity?” And Saint Athanasius said unto him, “O
foolish man, wait a little until thou seest the punishment that is for ever which shall come
upon thee, and upon thy emperor, and upon thy father Satan, the Enemy of God.” When
the officer heard this he was exceedingly wroth, and he commanded his soldiers to cut off
his head with the sword. And when Saint Athanasius heard this, he prayed to God that He
would give his soul rest with His saints, and that He would remove tribulation and
persecution from the Church, and that He would make strong the Empire of Rome, and the
kingdom of ‘Aksum. And when he had finished his prayer, he knelt down on his knees,
and a soldier cut off his head with the sword, and miracles without number took place
through his body. Salutation to Athanasius.
And on this day also are commemorated Edrona (Endoran), and Tobia, and nine thousand
soldiers of Antioch of the company of Isidore, and Andronicus, the governor, and his
army.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 19
(July 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the saints of the city of ‘Esna became martyrs, and the cause of their
martyrdom was this: Arianus, the governor, came to the city of Esna thrice. The first time
he killed the holy woman Dilaj and her four sons, whose names were Sares, and Harman,
and Yanufa, and Sentonita, and they finished their testimony on the seventh day of
Ginbot. The second time he killed four nobles whose names were Eusaphius, and Taman,
and Harwag, and Bacchus; and their martyrdoms took place on the seventh day of the
month of Sane. The third time he killed an old woman, who was lying on her bed inside
her house. And the soldiers of Arianus asked that old woman about the holy martyrs of the
city of ‘Esna, and she said unto them, “Behold, they are in the monastery which is called
by the name of Agathon; for they heard of the arrival of Arianus the governor, and they
knew that he would kill the Christians, and persecute them.” And after this the governor
commanded his soldiers to kill everyone they found, and they ceased not to kill everyone
they found, from the western [quarter] of the city, which is called “Sekyot Karim...” And
649

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
they found many people on the road, and they slew them until they came to the monastery
of the glorious father who is called “Isaac the solitary.” And at that time this good
shepherd, who was called Ammonius, gave them strength, and he comforted them and said
unto them, “Be strong and endure so that ye may enter into the kingdom of heaven.” And
whilst he was exhorting them thus, the governor came to them, and when they saw him
they all cried out with one voice, saying, “We are Christians.” And the governor
commanded the soldiers to kill them with the sword like sheep, and his soldiers rose up
and rushed upon them with swords and killed them. And the men of the cities of
Alexandria and ‘Esna, from the least of them to the greatest, both man and woman,
finished their good fight, on the nineteenth day of the month of Hamle; and the armies of
the angels received their souls, and crowned them with crowns of light. And the governor
went to the city of Aswan, and then returned to the city of ‘Esna, where he found three
laborers coming from the fields and carrying the implements of their toil with them. As
soon as they saw him they cried out boldly, saying, “We are Christians”; and when the
governor heard this he commanded his soldiers to cut off their heads with the implements
of their toil. Now their names were Surufas, and Antichius, and Mashadre, and they
finished their martyrdom on the eleventh day of the month of Meskerem. And the
governor bound in fetters this glorious father Abba Ammonius, the bishop, and he urged
him to sacrifice to idols, and when he refused to do so he commanded the soldiers to cast
him into the fire, and they did so, and he finished his martyrdom on the fourteenth day of
the month of Tahsas. And certain believing men took him and wrapped him in cloths, and
buried him in the place, which is called Bet-Hapes; and when the days of persecution were
ended they built a church over him, and they consecrated it in his name. Salutation to the
martyrs of ‘Esna.
And on this day also Saint Cyriacus (Qirkos) and Julitta (Iyalota) his mother became
martyrs. When this saint was a child, and his days were three years, his mother took him
and fled from the country of Rome to another country. And she found there the brother of
the governor from whom she had fled, and certain men laid information against her before
him, and he had her brought and questioned her about the worship of idols. And Saint
Julitta answered and said unto him, “Ask the child whose days are three years to tell us
what is right, and whether it is good for us to worship the gods or not.” And when the
soldiers of the governor went to her house they found Saint Cyriacus (Qirkos) her son, and
they brought him to the governor; and the governor questioned him about the worship of
idols. And God gave the child strength, and he spoke and cursed the emperor and his gods,
and at length he frightened all those who were there, and they marveled greatly at him.
And the governor was ashamed, and he tortured the child severely with every kind of
torture, the which even a grown up man could not endure, and he tortured Julitta (Iyalota),
the mother of the child, even as he tortured her son, but God raised them up whole and
uninjured. And because of this many people marveled, and believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ, and became martyrs, and the grace of the Holy Spirit descended upon them. And
the child Cyriacus (Qirkos) healed many sick folk, and performed great miracles. And
when fear came over his mother, and her faith dwindled, he prayed to God on her behalf,
and God lifted up her heart unto heaven, and she saw the habitation of the spirit, and she
became strong under the torture, and gave thanks to God. And she said unto her son, “O
my son, henceforward thou art my father, and I am thy blessed daughter; blessed be the
hour wherein I bore thee.” And when the governor was tired of torturing them he
commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads with the sword, and they did so, and the
650

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
saints received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to
Cyriacus (Qirkos).
On this day the holy and honorable Matlan (Batlan), the physician, became a martyr. This
saint was from a city, the name of which is Ta’madan, and his father, whose name was
Asturius, was an infidel, and his mother, whose name was ‘Ulana, was a believer. When
the child grew up, his father taught him writing and every kind of learning (or,
philosophy), and he became a very great and famous physician. And a certain man who
was a priest lived near their house, and when Batlan passed by, and he saw his comeliness
and his knowledge, and his wisdom and skill, and his understanding, he was sorry for him,
because he was a denier [of Christ]. And the priest entreated our Lord Jesus Christ on
behalf of Batlan, that He might guide him into the way of life, and bring him into the True
Faith. And having multiplied his petitions to God on behalf of Batlan, a time came when
God told the priest in a vision of the night that Batlan should believe through him, and the
priest rejoiced. And the priest always spoke to Batlan whenever he passed before him, and
saluted him, and through this custom friendship grew up between them; and Batlan used to
go into the priest’s house to talk with him about the Faith. And the priest explained to him
the uncleanness of idols, and the corruptness of heart of those who worshipped them, and
he showed him the glory of the Faith of Christ, and the knowledge and understanding of
those who serve Him; and then he made him to know that by the hands of all those who
believe in Christ our Lord miracles are wrought; and great healings effected. And when
Saint Batlan heard that all those who believe in Christ could perform miracles, he rejoiced
exceedingly, and he longed to perform miracles for himself, and he fulfilled his desire with
wisdom and worked miracles; for he believed in our Lord through that priest, who taught
him at all times. And one day Saint Batlan was passing through the market place of the
city, and he saw a man whom a serpent had bitten lying on the ground and the serpent was
standing up before him. And he said within himself, “I will stand up that I may put to the
test the words of the priest, my teacher, who saith unto me, ‘If thou dost belong to our Lord
Jesus Christ, thou shalt work miracles in His Name.’” And he drew nigh unto the man
whom the snake had bitten, and he prayed a long prayer, and asked Christ to make
manifest His power and heal the man, and kill the serpent, so that it might not do harm to
any one else. And when he had finished his prayer the man rose up alive and whole, and
without pain, and the serpent fell down and died straightway. And Batlan’s faith
increased, and he went to the priest who baptized him with Christian baptism, and he used
to visit him continually. One day a blind man came unto him that he might heal him, and
when the father of the saint saw him he sent him away. And Batlan questioned his father
about this, and he said unto him, “Who was the man that was enquiring for me?” And his
father answered, and said unto him, “It was a blind man, and thou canst not heal him.”
And the saint answered and said unto his father, “Thou shalt see [the power of] God.” And
he called the blind man back, and said unto him, “If thou canst see wilt thou believe in the
God Who shall heal thine eyes for thee?” And the blind man said unto him, “Yea, I will
believe.” And the saint prayed over him for a long time, and then he laid his hand upon the
eyes of the blind man, and said unto him, “In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ receive
thy sight”; and straightway the blind man’s eyes were opened. And when the father of the
saint saw this he believed, together with the man who was blind, on our Lord Jesus Christ,
and Batlan took them to the priest, his teacher, who baptized them both with Christian
baptism. And when the father of the saint died, Batlan set his slaves free, and gave the
greater part (?) of his money to the poor. And he practiced medicine, and healed men
without payment, but he required those whom he healed to believe on Christ. And the
651

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
[other] physicians were jealous of him, and they laid information against him, and the
priest, and the man who was blind, and many other believers, before the king. And the
king was wroth with them, and he said unto them, “Sacrifice ye to the gods,” but they
refused to obey him, and the soldiers cut off their heads with the sword and they received
crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And after this the king tortured Saint
Batlan very severely, and many signs and wonders appeared through him, and many men
believed through him, whilst he was under torture, and became martyrs. And the king was
wroth with Saint Batlan, and cast him to the lions, but they would not injure him, and only
licked his feet; and the king commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword,
and they did so, and thus he finished his fight, and received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Batlan.
Salutation Isaac, the righteous man.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Batrabo, and Macarius of Falga Halib, and
Moses of Shoki.
Salutation to Abel, the son of Takla Haymanot.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 20
(July 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy and honorable Theodore the Great, the General, became a martyr.
The name of the father of this saint was “John” and he was a man from the city of Sebt in
Upper Egypt, and the governor took the father of this saint with his regiment and carried
him to the city of Antioch. And John dwelt there, and married a certain noble lady of that
city who was a worshipper of idols, (now she did not know whom her husband John
worshipped) and he begot by her this Saint Theodore. And when his mother wanted to
present him in the house of idols, and to teach him their worship, his father would not let
her do so; and because of this she was angry with him, and drove him away from her, and
the child Theodore was left with his mother. And his father John prayed, and entreated
God to guide his son Theodore into the path of righteousness. And Saint Theodore grew
up, and studied philosophy, and [other] learning, and Christ illumined the eyes of his heart;
and he went to a righteous bishop, whose name was ‘Alakes, who baptized him with
Christian baptism. And when his mother heard of this she sorrowed with a great sorrow.
And after this he made enquiries concerning his father, as to whether he was alive or dead,
and one of his servants told him the matter concerning his father privily, and how his
mother had driven away his father, because he was a Christian. And Saint Theodore grew
up, and was exceedingly strong in battle, and the king made him a general. And when the
king went forth to fight against the men of Persia, this saint did valiantly, and he captured
the son of the King of Persia, who was on his horse, and all his company with him. And
after a few days the Barbarians rose up against the country of Rome, and destroyed many
cities. And when the Emperor Diocletian heard of this he was exceedingly afraid, and he
summoned Theodore and said unto him, “What shall we do? Take with thee all thy
652

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
soldiers, and all thy weapons of war, and set out for the war.” And Saint Theodore
answered and said unto him, “Take thy weapons of war and give them to thy slaves, for I
have no need of weapons of war, because my trust is in the help of my Lord Jesus Christ.
This spear, which is in my hand, and the horse, which I ride, are profitable to me through
the might of my Lord Jesus Christ. I will set out alone for the war, and will not take a
soldier with me, for my God will go forth with me to the war, and He, the Creator of the
universe, will help me.” And the emperor said unto him, “Do what thou pleasest, but
behold, our enemies have drawn nigh.” And on the following day the saint went forth to
war, and the emperor said unto him, “What strength hast thou to fight against the
Barbarians, who are a people many in number?” And the saint answered and said unto
him, “Stand here with thy army, and I will go out against them alone, and thou shalt see
what shall come upon them, and I believe, by God, that not one of them shall ever return to
his house”; and the emperor and all those who were with him marveled. And then Saint
Theodore went to the war by himself, and he left the emperor and went a long way off
from him, namely a distance of three stadia. And when Saint Theodore arrived at the city
(camp?) of the Barbarians, he said unto them, “Will ye fight, or will ye depart in peace?”
And they said unto him, “Who are we to fight? We do not see any men to fight except
thyself.” And Theodore said unto them, “I want no one, for I by myself in the might of my
God will destroy you all.” And the Barbarians said unto him, “Peradventure thou hast
come out to fight a dog? If thou wilt select the least among us, he shall come to thee, and
fight thee.” And straightway Saint Theodore came down from his horse, and turned his
face towards the East, and he prayed, saying, “O my Lord and God, Who didst strengthen
Daniel the prophet, and enable him to destroy the idols, and to kill the serpent in the city of
Babylon, do Thou be with me in the same manner this day, and strengthen me by Thy help
so that I may praise Thy Name for ever and ever, Amen.” And when he had finished his
prayer he took his spear in his hand, and made over it the sign of the Cross, and he leaped
upon his horse, and cried out to the Barbarians, saying, “Come to me so that we may fight
with you; I am the servant of my Lord Jesus Christ.” And straightway he charged in
among them with his spear in his hand, and he destroyed all the Barbarians and not one of
them escaped, either on his horse, or by running away on foot. And Saint Theodore cut off
the heads of their officers and brought them to the emperor with him, and the emperor and
all his army welcomed him; and all the men of the city of Antioch bowed down before
him. And they laid waste all the country of the Barbarians. And there was in the city of
‘Eukitos a great serpent which the people used to worship, and they gave it each day two
men to devour. And there was in that city a certain woman, who was a widow and a
Christian, and she had two sons, and the people took them and set them before the serpent
for it to devour them. And at that time Saint Theodore came to the city of ‘Eukitos, and
the widow stood up before him weeping, and she told him all that had befallen her, and
how they had taken her sons for the serpent. And when he learned that the woman was a
Christian he said within himself, “They have wronged this woman, but God shall avenge
her.” And he came down from his horse, and turned his face towards the East and prayed,
and after he had finished his prayer he drew nigh the serpent; and all the people were
watching him from the tops of the walls of the city. Now the length of the serpent was
fourteen cubits, but God gave him power over it, and he speared it with his spear and killed
it, and delivered the sons of the widow. After this he departed into Upper Egypt to search
for his father, and he asked about him, and they brought his father to him, and he knew by
a certain mark that Theodore was his son. And he lived with his father until he died, and
then he returned to the city of Antioch. And he found that the Emperor Diocletian was
653

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
denying Christ, and worshipping idols, and was bringing tribulation upon the Christian
folk, who believed on the Name of Christ; and he stood up before him and confessed our
Lord Christ. Now the priests of the idols of the men of the city of ‘Eukitos had already
laid information against him before the emperor, saying, “The man who killed the serpent
worships [Christ].” And on the morrow the emperor sent, and had Theodore brought
before him, and he said unto him, “Who dost thou do this evil thing?” And Saint Theodore
answered and said unto him, “Every evil work is from thee, O son of sin, who hast
forsaken the God of heaven, and dost worship unclean idols; God shall destroy thy
kingdom quickly.” And straightway the emperor was wroth, and he commanded a hundred
soldiers and they threw Theodore upon the ground, and beat him with rods in relays. And
they beat him and then rested, and at length his flesh was cut into strips and his blood
flowed on the ground like water. And whilst he was under this torture Michael, and angel
of God, came down and stood before him, and said unto him, “Be strong, O Theodore,
behold the time of the hours of thy fight hath drawn nigh, and many signs and wonders
shall appear in the place where thy body is laid. And behold, our Lord Jesus Christ
promiseth thee a righteous promise, and saith unto thee. ‘All those who shall celebrate thy
commemoration, or fill the hungry with good, or give alms on the day of thy
commemoration, or give drink to the thirsty, or shall give an offering or incense, or a book
to the church in thy name, I will erase their sins from the roll, and they shall never see
punishment. Whosoever shall write a book of thy fight, or cause it to be read, or shall
listen to it, or shall acquire it, I will write their names in the Book of Life.’” And when the
angel had said this he went up to heaven in great glory. And straightway all the soldiers of
the emperor and all the people gathered together, and they cried out and said unto him,
“God shall destroy thee, O infidel, by the spirit of His mouth, and He shall do it in wrath
because thou dost torture Saint Theodore, the mighty and strong man, who hath delivered
us out of the hand of our enemies.” And they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and on
that day many of the people and of the soldiers of the emperor became martyrs. And after
this Diocletian, the infidel, commanded the soldiers and they brought an iron bed and laid
the saint upon it, and lighted a fire beneath it, and the flames of the fire soared upwards.
And Saint Theodore said, “O my Lord, deliver Thou me as Thou didst deliver the Three
Children from the fiery furnace”; and straightway the fire was extinguished, and it became
cold as dew at the time of dawn. And there came a voice from heaven, saying, “O thou to
whom power hath been given by our Lord Christ, be strong!” And straightway the saint
stood up before the emperor and said unto him, “O infidel, be ashamed, for our Lord Jesus
Christ hath delivered me from all torture.” And when the general of the emperor saw this
he believed in our Lord Christ, and he cried out with a loud voice, saying, “There is no god
but the God of Saint Theodore”; and he became a martyr. And when the emperor was tired
of torturing him, he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and to burn
his body in the fire, and by the Will of God they carried him to the door of his mother’s
house, and there they cut off his head, and blood and milk flowed out. And they lighted a
large fire, and cast his body into it, but the fire neither touched it nor burnt a hair of his
head. And his mother gave much money to the soldiers, and took his body and wrapped it
up in rich cloths, and hid it in her house until the end of the days of persecution. And they
built for him a church and many monasteries, and they laid his body in the monastery of
his father’s city Sebt in Upper Egypt, and many signs and wonders and great healings took
place through it. The end of his martyrdom took place on the twentieth day of the month
of Hamle, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
Salutation to Theodore.
654

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Salutation to the purification of Hanna, the mother of Mary.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Theocytus, and Saint Timothy, Archbishop
of Alexandria, and Moses, and Julitta, and the four hundred and forty martyrs who were
with Cyriacus.
Salutation to Gabra Iyasus and to Thekla.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 21
(July 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated a festival in honor of our Lady, Saint Mary the Virgin, the Godbearer. Salutation to thee, O Mary.
And on this day also died Saint Susenius, the eunuch. This saint was one of the officers of
the Emperor Theodosius, and grace and wisdom were upon him, and his compassion was
great, and his acquaintance could be made by all men. He visited all those who were sick,
and comforted them, and he enquired into their tribulations and helped them. And when
one hundred bishops assembled for the Second Council of Ephesus because of Nestorius,
Abba Cyril, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, came, and this saint ministered unto him
and all his bishops, and provided for them. At that time he fell sick of a grievous sickness,
and he saw a vision as it were of some one calling him to the Great Marriage Feast, and he
told Saint Abba Cyril what he had seen. And Abba Cyril said unto him, “Dost thou wish
me to ask my Lord Jesus Christ to heal thee of thy sickness?” And he answered and said
unto him, “Yea, until I can give my possessions to the poor.” And Abba Cyril prayed for
him, and he recovered from his sickness, and he rose up and gave all his possessions to the
poor and needy, and then he lay down and died in peace. And Saint Abba Cyril prayed
over him, and he prepared him for burial, and buried him, and commanded the people to
celebrate a festival of commemoration on the day of his death, which is the twenty-first
day of the month of Hamle. Salutation to Susenius.
Salutation to the birth of Eustathius.
And on this day also died the blessed Lawa-Christos. This saint was a man in the world,
and when he married a wife he lived with her in virginity, and served God with fasting, and
with prayer; and at nighttime they put on sackcloth, and each slept alone. In the daytime
he used to go about in the desert watching sheep, and she used to prepare a table for
strangers and pilgrims; and in the evening he washed their feet, and she ministered to them
at table and brought their food. And then they asked God to reveal to certain perfect
monks what manner of work theirs was, and a voice came unto them from heaven, saying,
[to the monks] “Your fight hath not been as great as that of Lawa-Christos and his wife.”
And when those monks had gone to them, they enquired into their works, and with great
difficulty the saint told them; and the monks departed wondering. And leading this life of
fighting Lawa-Christos and his wife died. Salutation to Lawa-Christos and his wife.
655

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day is celebrated also the festival of the angel Urael, and on this day also are
commemorated the Abuna Betselote Mikael, and ‘Oyoranos (Yoranos), the officer who
was present when our Lord was pierced with a spear on the Cross. Salutation to Urael.
Salutation to Betselote Mikael.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 22
(July 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Macarius, the son of Saint Basilides, the general and martyr, became a
martyr. When information had been laid before Diocletian that this saint would not
worship idols, the emperor wrote and ordered the governor to send him to the city of
Alexandria. And Macarius embraced his parents, and commanded them to take care of the
poor and the needy, and went forth with the letter of the emperor. And our Lord Jesus
Christ appeared unto him in a vision and gave him strength to endure, and He informed
him what should happen into him. And when he arrived in the city of Alexandria, and
stood up before Hermanus the governor, Hermanus knew that he was the son of Basilides
the general, and he persuaded him earnestly, and besought him to turn from his counsel;
but he would neither submit, nor turn from his good counsel, and the governor tortured him
severely, with divers kinds of tortures. And whilst Macarius was undergoing torture his
soul (or, mind) was caught up, and God showed him the habitation of the saints, and the
habitation of his father and brother. And after this the governor sent him to the city of
Nikyos, and there the governor tortured him severely. And they cut out his tongue, and
hacked off his arms, and they thrust red-hot iron goads into his sides; but God gave him the
strength to endure this, and He raised him up whole and uninjured. And God performed
many signs and wonders by his hands, and among them are the following: Certain men
passed before him carrying a dead man whom they were going to bury, and whilst all the
people were watching him Saint Macarius made entreaty to our Lord Jesus Christ on
behalf of the dead man, and prayed Him to make manifest His praise on him; and then he
prayed and the dead man rose up and told the people what he had seen. And he said unto
them, “Christ is the Lord of the Universe,” and when they heard this many of the people
believed on our Lord Jesus Christ; and the soldiers cut off their heads with the sword, and
they received the crown of martyrdom. Now Arianus, the governor of Antinoe, dwelt
there, and when he returned he took Saint Macarius with him. And when they arrived at
the city of Setnuf the ship stood still (i.e. ran aground), and could not be moved; and when
they arrived at the city of Antinoe our Lord appeared unto Saint Macarius in a vision and
said unto him, “In this place thy fight shall finish, and in it shall thy body lie.” And the
governor commanded the soldiers to put Saint Macarius upon the rack, and they did so,
and then they cut off his head, and he finished his fight, and received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom on the heavens. And when Constantine reigned there was
appointed by him a governor, whose name was Eulogius, a believer, and he commanded
them to open the churches, and to build up those that were ruined, and to destroy the
houses of idols. And Saint Macarius appeared unto him in the night and informed him
concerning the place wherein was his body. Then Eulogius rose up, and came to that
656

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
place, and found the body of the saint; and he took it away from there, and they built a
church for it and laid it therein, and great signs and miracles took place through it.
Salutation to Macarius.
And on this day also the holy and honorable Leontius became a martyr. This saint became
a Christian through his father, who was a soldier in the army of the infidel emperor, and
was a man of the city of Trablos. He was exceedingly godly in appearance, and was
perfect in his fight, and he read the Divine Books continually, and learned many of them
by heart, specially the Psalms of David, which he used to recite frequently, and for this
reason he knew them by heart. He admonished his fellow-soldiers constantly, and he
taught them the fear of God, and he encouraged them and said unto them, “Waste not your
years in the service of idols.” And there were some who submitted to his words, and
turned away from their infidelity, and forsook their error, and the unclean iniquity wherein
they had been living hitherto; and there were others into whom Satan entered, and they
went to their general, and said unto him, “Leontius holdeth idols in contempt, and he
teacheth and saith that Christ is God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, and of all
that is therein.” And the governor had Leontius brought, and he questioned him,
concerning this matter, and Leontius confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor,
even as Paul the apostle saith, “Who shall separate me from the love of Christ my God,
Whom I have served, and worshipped, from my youth up?” (Romans viii, 35). And the
governor was wroth, and commanded the soldiers to bind him hand and foot, and cast him
into the prison house; and they did even as the governor commanded. And on the
following day the governor had him brought before him, and he said unto him, “By what
power dost thou presume to transgress the edict of the emperor and dost turn men from the
worship of the gods?” And the saint answered and said unto him, “In truth I would that all
men would enter into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. If thou wilt forsake thine error,
and the service of idols, and wilt worship our Lord and God and Redeemer Jesus Christ,
thou shalt inherit an everlasting kingdom”; and then he cursed the gods of the governor and
his unclean idols. And the soldiers beat him severely, until his blood ran down upon the
ground, and all the while they were torturing him he glorified God and sang his praises.
And one of the soldiers was sorry for him, and he whispered in his ear, and said unto him,
“I am sorry for thee. Have pity on thy youth and speak only one word, and tell the
governor that thou wilt sacrifice to the gods, and I will undertake to set thee free.” And the
saint cursed him, and thrust him away from him, saying, “Get thee from me, Satan!” And
when the governor saw his endurance, and his fortitude, he doubled his torture; and at
length his body was cut into strips and his blood poured on the ground. Then the governor
commanded them to drown him in the river, or to drag him by the feet and cast him into
prison until he could decide what to do with him; and when they had done these things to
him he died in prison. And a certain woman who was a believer came and gave the
keepers of the prison house and the soldiers much money, and she took the saint and
wrapped him up in new and costly cloths, and she made a covering worked with gold to
spread over his bier, and she laid him in a coffin in the house, and had a picture of him
painted upon it; and she hung before it a lamp which burned continually. Salutation to
Leontius, the lamp of Trablos.
And on this day also is commemorated Saint Markolos (Marcellus).
Salutation to Longinus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
657

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 23
(July 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the holy woman Marina became a martyr. The name of the father of this saint
was Decius, high priest of the gods of the city of Antioch; now at that time Decius was
emperor. And when Saint Marina was five years old her mother died, and her father
committed her to a nurse so that she might live outside the city; now this nurse was a
Christian, and she taught Marina all the Faith of Christ. And when Marina reached the age
of fifteen years, her father died. One day she heard her nurse talking about the labors and
fights of the martyrs, and the love of Christ entered her heart, and she went about seeking
to become a martyr. And a wicked governor came to this city, and as soon as he saw her
he commanded the soldiers to bring her before him, and he said unto her, “Whence art
thou? What is thy name?” And she said, “I am one of the people of Jesus Christ, and my
name is Marina.” When the governor saw her grace and her beauty, he could not restrain
himself, and he persuaded her with many words to consent to his wish. When she cursed
him, and reviled his gods, he commanded the soldiers to beat her with iron rods, and to cut
off her limbs, and to scrape her body until her blood flowed like water, and he also
commanded them to scrape her members with an iron scraper, [and they did so]; but when
Saint Marina prayed to God, Michael the Archangel came and healed her. And the
governor commanded them to take her into a prison house, which was filled with darkness,
and whilst she was praying the Archangel Michael came, and lighted up the prison house,
and took her up into heaven, where he showed her the dwelling of the saints and the
righteous, and then he brought her back to her place. And on the following day the
governor commanded the soldiers to scrape her with an iron scraper, and to slit her body
with butchers’ knives, and to cast her into prison; and Saint Michael came and healed her.
And whilst she was standing up praying, a huge and most terrifying serpent came forth
from this prison, and when she saw it she was frightened and her whole body trembled,
and she could not speak. And the serpent swallowed her up, her hands being extended in
the form of a cross, and she was praying in her heart. Thereupon the belly of the serpent
was split open, and Marina went forth from him uninjured, and she gave thanks to God.
And when she turned towards the prison house, she saw Satan seated, and he was in the
form of a black man, with his hands clutching his knees. And having made the sign of the
Cross over her face, she seized him by the hair of his head, and beat him with a rod
severely. And then there was revealed unto her the wood of the Cross of Jesus Christ, and
a white dove was sitting upon it, and it spoke, saying, “Rejoice, O Marina, for there is
committed to thee the pledge of the grace of the Holy Spirit.” And on the following day
the governor commanded the soldiers to strip her naked, and to hang her up, head
downwards, and to burn her body with fire, and to cast her into a cauldron of boiling water;
[and they did so]. And as she was standing up in the cauldron and praying, a dove came
down from heaven, and he had in his beak a crown of gold, and he loosed her fetters, and
dipped her in the water thrice, in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit;
and she went forth from the water praising God. And when the governor saw that she was
still alive he commanded them to cut off her head with the sword. And when she had
come into the place of martyrdom she prayed to God that He would receive her soul in
peace. And our Lord Jesus Christ came unto her, and gave her a promise that He would
forgive the sins of everyone who should call upon her name, or write the history of her
658

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
strife, or have it read, or should hear it read; and then the soldiers cut off her head with the
sword. And many miracles became manifest [through her], the blind saw, the lame
walked, the deaf heard, and the dumb spoke; and countless folk believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ. Salutation to Marina.
And on this day also Saint Longinus became a martyr. This saint came from the country of
Cappadocia, but by race he was a Greek. And when Tiberius Caesar reigned, he appointed
Pilate governor of the land of Judah, and he gave this Saint Longinus to him among his
other soldiers. And when the time arrived, and the Lord wished to suffer for the salvation
of His people, He permitted the wicked Jews to perform this thing. When they had made
themselves ready for this deed, this Longinus was one of the soldiers whom Pilate
commanded to crucify our Lord. And because of this the Jews gave him much money, and
he worked and did the will of the Jews, and he pierced our Lord with a spear after He had
delivered up His soul, and blood and water flowed from His side. And when this saint saw
this he marveled exceedingly. And when, at the time of the Crucifixion, he saw that the
sun became dark, and that the moon became like blood, and that the curtain of the Temple
was rent, and that the rocks were split open, and that the dead rose up, his wonder was
greatly increased; now he had heard and seen the miracles which our Lord performed from
His Birth to His Crucifixion. And when the righteous Joseph took the body of our Lord
and Redeemer, and laid it in the cave, this saint was standing there with the guards when
they sealed the tomb. And when our Lord rose, the tomb being sealed, this Longinus was
dismayed, and he asked God to explain to him this mystery. And our Lord sent unto him
the Apostle Peter, and he found him on the day of the Resurrection of our Lord. And
Longinus asked the Apostle Peter, and adjured him to tell him the whole history of the
Redeemer; and the Apostle Peter told him everything, which had been prophesied
concerning our Redeemer, and how He was the Son of the Living God. And this saint
believed through the Apostle Peter, and he abandoned the service of an earthly king, and
departed to the country of Cappadocia, and he preached therein in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, like the Apostles. When Pilate heard about this he was exceedingly wroth,
and sent and reported him to Tiberius, and the emperor had him brought and tortured him
and cut off his head with the sword; and the saint received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Longinus.
And on this day also Saint ‘Abtlemanos (Ptolemy), of Shoka, became a martyr.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 24
(July 31)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Abba Nob, of the city of Nekhisa, on the borders of the lower land in the
north of Egypt, became a martyr. The parents of this saint were holy and pure, and
instructed folk; and having gotten this Saint Abba Nob, they reared him in the fear of God.
And when his days were twelve years he loved the Church, and he loved to listen to the
Scriptures and to doctrine. And when Diocletian brought tribulation upon the Christian
659

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
folk, this Nob determined in his heart to shed his blood for the Name of our Lord Christ.
And at that time he went into a church and heard the priest teaching the believers and
strengthened them in the True Faith, and he said unto them, “Keep yourselves from the
worship of idols, and it shall be good for you to deliver yourselves over to death for the
Name of Christ.” And this saint returned to his house, sad and sorrowful, and he set before
him everything which his father had left him, gold, and silver, and apparel, and he said,
“Behold it is written, ‘The world shall pass away and the desire thereof’ (cf. Matthew v,
18).” And straightway he rose up, and gave all his money to the poor and needy, and he
departed to the city of Gamnudi, walking thither on his feet along the river bank, and he
found the governor Lucius, and he confessed before him the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And the angel of God appeared unto him there, and encouraged him and told him
everything, which should happen to him; and the governor tortured him very severely.
And when the governor went to the south he took the saint with him, and he hung him up
upon the mast of the ship. And the governor sat down to eat and to drink, and immediately
he did so the vessel which was in his hand stood still like a stone, and the eyes of the
soldiers were blinded. And the angel of God came down from heaven, and released the
saint from his hanging position, and he wiped up the blood, which had run down from his
nose and mouth, and then the wind blew and they came to the city of Athribis. And the
governor of Athribis knew what had happened to the governor of Gamnudi, and when the
soldiers saw it they unfastened their belts, and cast them before the governor, and they
confessed our Lord Christ and became martyrs. And they tortured Saint Abba Nob very
severely in Athribis. They laid him on an iron bed, and lighted a fire beneath it, and Abba
Nob prayed whilst he was on the iron bed, and God delivered him. And after this the
soldiers sawed him asunder with a saw, and they cut off his limbs, and the angel of God
came down from heaven and delivered him, and raised him up whole and unharmed. And
then they took the saint to the city of Alexandria, and they tortured him there severely, and
they heaped on him deadly serpents, but they neither approached him nor harmed him.
And one of the serpents went and coiled itself round the neck of the governor, who asked
Abba Nob to have mercy upon him. And the saint commanded the serpent to leave the
governor, and it came down off his back, and the governor commanded the pagan priests
and the magicians to burn it with fire. And Julius, who was from the city of ‘Akfahas,
came to Abba Nob, and asked him about his fight, and the name of his city, and he wrote
down all [the story of] his fight. And when the governor was tired of torturing him, he
commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword; and our Lord Christ appeared
unto him, and comforted him and told him great healing should be derived from his body
wherever it might be laid. And He said that God would deliver from his tribulation
everyone who should ask this from Him in the name of Abba Nob, and that God would
forgive the sins of every one who celebrated his commemoration, or who satisfied the
hungry with food, or who gave drink to him that was parched, or who gave incense or an
offering [to the church], or who wrote a copy of the book of his fight. And then the
soldiers cut off his head, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. And Julius took the body of Abba Nob, and sent it with his servants to the city of
Nekhisa, and when the days of persecution were ended, they built a church in his name,
and many signs and miracles took place in it. And the body of the saint is in the town of
Gamnudi to this day. Salutation to Nob.
And on this day also Abba Takla ‘Adonaya, of Debre Libanos, and Tewolde Medhin, and
their companions, became martyrs.
660

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also fourteen thousand and eighty-four companions of Abba Nob (var.
nineteen thousand and eighty-four) became martyrs.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Simon, the forty-second Archbishop of the
city of Alexandria. This saint came from the East, and his parents brought him to the
monastery of the west of the city of Alexandria, wherein is the body of Saint Severus; and
he became a monk there, and he learned to read and to write, and he learned by heart the
Books of the Church. And Abba Agathon made him a priest, and after this God chose him
to become archbishop; and when he was appointed priest he served his spiritual father in
the administration of the archiepiscopate. And he lived by himself, fasting, and praying,
and reading the Scriptures, and he ate only bread, and salt, and cumin, and uncooked
herbs. And he fought a perfect fight, and his devotion was sincere, and he made the soul of
lust, which was in him to be subject to his rational and understanding soul. And God
wrought great signs and miracles by his hands, among which were the following: Certain
men of the priests of the city of Alexandria were envious of him, and they went to some
magicians and gave them much money, and they prepared a deadly poison for them, and
gave it to them. And those evil priests took that poison, and mixed it with some drink, and
poured it into a glass, and gave it to the archbishop and then they asked him to drink, and
to give them his blessing. And the archbishop drank that drink after he had received the
Holy Mysteries, and no harm whatsoever came to him. And after this they mixed that
poison [with other things], and gave it to him a second and a third time, and it did him no
harm, and the priests marveled at his escape. Then they went to the market and found new
figs there, and they bought some and worked up some of that poison in some of the figs;
and the wicked priests arranged together to give him the poisoned [figs] before he received
the Holy Mysteries and was fasting. And the magicians said unto them, “If ye can make
him swallow it, his belly will split open straightway.” And those deniers [of Christ] went
to him with deceit, and they asked the archbishop to eat of the figs, and they pressed him,
and against his will they thrust the figs into his mouth; now he did not wish to swallow
them before he received the Holy Mysteries. And having swallowed them, his belly was
moved that night, and he remained sick for four days. And the angel of God appeared unto
him in a vision by night, and made known to him the cause of his sickness, and he revealed
unto him the names of those who had prepared the poison for him. And in those days ‘Abd
Al-aziz, Khalifah of Egypt, came to the city of Alexandria, and Abba Simon, the
archbishop, went out to welcome him. And the Khalifah saw the traces of his illness on
the face of this father, and he asked the scribes, saying, “What hath happened to the
archbishop that his appearance is thus?” And they told him what had happened, and how
they had prepared poison for him; and the Khalifah was wroth, and commanded [his
soldiers] to burn the priests and the magicians in the fire. And the archbishop bowed down
to the ground and wept, and besought the Khalifah to have mercy on them, and the
Khalifah said unto him, “Assuredly not, nay they shall burn them in the fire as they
deserve.” And the father said unto him, “If thou dost burn them, I shall have neither
priests nor archiepiscopate”; and the Khalifah marveled at his gentleness and compassion.
And the Khalifah commanded, and the soldiers drove into exile the priests, and burned the
magicians in the fire by Karos. And the Khalifah loved this holy father greatly, and paid
him much honor, and he commanded him to build churches and monasteries; and the
archbishop built churches, and he built [one] by the city of Al-Wah to the south of Egypt,
and very many other churches. And God made manifest great miracles by his hands,
among them being the following: By his prayer he raised up to life a certain priest called
Minas, after he was dead and had been made ready for burial; and the description of his
661

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
raising up is thus. This father Simon had appointed Minas to be the administrator of all the
property of the Church, and he had to take car of the sacred moneys and endowments, and
the sacred vestments were laid up in his charge. And this father used to charge him
always, saying, “Do not let any of the money and property of the Church be laid up in thy
house.” And it fell out that a sickness came upon him suddenly, and his tongue stuck fast
in his throat, and his heart failed him. When the archbishop heard of it he was exceedingly
sorry, and he kept vigil all that night, and prayed to God on behalf of that priest, and asked
Him to raise up that priest from the dead, because of the property of the Church. And at
midnight this father heard that the priest was nigh to die, and he sent his disciple to the
wife of the priest, and commanded him to ask her about the property of the Church; and
when his disciple drew near to the house of the priest he heard the outcries of the people
thereof, who were weeping for the priest. And he went in and found that he was dead, and
that they were dressing him in the vestments of the priesthood and laying him on the bier;
and there were many men round about him weeping for him. And the disciple bowed his
head in salutation to the priest, and straightway the dead man rose and sat up, and he
embraced the disciple with his arms and hands, and he said unto him, “God is the God of
the honorable father, Abba Simon.” And the disciple said unto him, “Be strong, O priest,
and fear not.” And the priest said unto him, “Verily, I am strong through the prayer of my
lord father, the archbishop, and God hath given me life again, and hath raised me up from
the dead.” And the disciple called the priests who were struck with dismay at the death of
that priest, and he said unto them, “Be not dismayed, behold the priest Minas hath risen
from the dead.” And when the priests and the people came to him, the priest said unto
them, “Know ye that I was dead, and they set me before the throne of my Lord Christ.
And I saw all the archbishops of the city of Alexandria, from Mark the apostle, to Abba
Isaac, and they were standing before our Lord Christ. And they rebuked me, saying, ‘Why
hast thou hidden the property of the Church from our brother Simon the archbishop?’ And
our Lord Christ commanded them, saying, ‘Cast him into the Outer Darkness.’ And when
they dragged me along to cast me out, the archbishops bowed down before our Lord
Christ, and asked Him, saying, ‘Have mercy upon us this time. Our brother Simon, the
archbishop, is at this moment standing up and praying for him, and for the property of the
Church which was laid up with him.’ And God accepted their petition, and He
commanded and [the angels] put back my soul into my body. And God said unto me,
‘Behold, I have had compassion on thee for the sake of My chosen ones, and for the sake
of their brother Simon, the archbishop. And if thou dost not speak of thine own free will,
and reveal unto him where the property of the Church is, thou shalt not return hither, and I
will not accept their petition on thy behalf, according to what the Lord telleth Me, and I
will not make thee to live after thy death.’” And when all the people who were there heard
these words, and saw this miracle, they marveled exceedingly, and they praised God the
Most High; and straightway their sorrow and weeping were turned into joy. And after that
priest was restored to life he remained many days, and he used to relate this miracle to
every man. And this father Abba Simon continued to fight the fight and to devote himself
to God, and to teach his flock, and to admonish them and to encourage them in the True
Faith, and after this he died in peace. Salutation to Simon the archbishop.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

662

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Hamle 25
(August 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the dedication of the Church of Saint Mercurius, the martyr, in the
city of Mesr (Cairo), wherein his miracles appeared. Salutation to the consecration of thy
church, O Mercurius.
And on this day also the ascension into heaven of Enoch, the righteous scribe, took place.
And on this day also Abba Ze-Iyesus, of Debre Libanos, became a martyr by the hand of
the pagans. Salutation to Ze-Iyesus.
And on this day also the apostolic woman Saint Thecla died. This saint lived in the days of
Saint Paul, the apostle. And when Saint Paul, the apostle, went forth from the city of
Antioch he departed to the city of Nicomedia; and there was in that place a certain
believer, whose name was Sefaros, who took Saint Paul, and set him in his house. And a
great many people gathered together to him, and they heard his teaching. And when this
virgin Thecla heard Saint Paul, the apostle, teaching, she looked out from the window of
her house that she might hear his doctrine, and she did this for three days and three nights.
And she was so eager to hear his doctrine, that she neither ate nor drank; and the word of
his teaching entered into her heart. And her parents and her servants were very sorry, and
they used to beseech her to turn from her counsel, and not to follow Saint Paul. And her
father went to Demas and Remoganos, the magistrates, and complained to them about what
had happened to his daughter, and they urged him, and at length he went to the emperor.
And he cried out and laid information against Saint Paul, and the emperor had him brought
into the hall of the emperor, and he questioned him about his work and his Faith, but found
no cause of complaint [against him]; and the emperor commanded and the soldiers shut
Saint Paul up in prison. And Saint Thecla put off her ornamental attire, and came to saint
Paul in the prison house, and she bowed down at his feet. And her parents sought for her,
and could not find her, and [her handmaiden] told them that she was with Saint Paul the
apostle; and the governor commanded the soldiers to burn her in the fire. And her mother
cried out, saying, “Burn her in the fire, so that all the numerous women of noble families
who believe in the teaching of Paul the apostle may be admonished.” And they brought
Thecla out from Saint Paul to burn her, and they brought Saint Paul out also. And her
heart was bold, and she saw Saint Paul praying, and he went up into heaven whilst in his
body; and when he had made the sign of the Cross over her face and her body, she threw
herself into the fire; and the women wept for her. And at that moment God sent very much
rain, and lightning and hail, and the red-hot furnace became like unto cool dew. And she
escaped from the fire, and ran and came to saint Paul in the place wherein he dwelt
secretly; and she asked him to shave off the hair of her head, so that she might follow him;
and he did this for her. And when she went to the city of Antioch, a certain nobleman saw
her, and wanted to marry her, for she was very beautiful in her appearance, but she made
bold and cursed him, and he informed the governor of the city about her. And the
governor commanded the soldiers to cast her to the lions, and she was with the lions for
two days and two nights, but the lions only licked her feet. And after this they tied her
between two oxen and dragged her through all the city, but she suffered no pain
whatsoever. Then the governor sent her away, and she went to saint Paul, and he
663

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
comforted her, and strengthened her, and commanded her to depart, and preach the Faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And she went to the city of Konia, and preached in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and then she went to her own city and converted her father and her
mother, and brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And having finished her
fight she died in peace and received the crown of the preachers and confessors in the
kingdom of the heavens. Now her body resteth at the present time in the city of Sengar
[near Damietta] in Lower Egypt, and many signs and wonders have appeared through it.
Salutation to the apostolic woman Thecla.
And on this day also Saint ‘Adonin (Andonina) became a martyr. This young man was a
native of the city of Bana, and his parents were among the elders of the city; and they were
believers, and were excellent and merciful. And this saint went to the city of Antinoe and
confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor, who commanded the soldiers to shoot
him to death with arrows; and they did as he commanded, but the arrows did the saint no
harm. Then the governor had him bound, and sent him to the city of Alexandria, and with
him were Saint Abba Bimakos, and two other martyrs; and the governor of the city of
Alexandria shut them up in prison. And they hung up Saint ‘Adonin, head downwards,
until much blood flowed from his mouth down upon the ground, and then he tortured him
severely; and when the governor was tired of torturing him, he sent him to the city of
Farma, where the saint found Saint Minas in prison; and he rejoiced in him, and they
comforted each other. And the governor of the city of Farma tortured him with every kind
of torture, and they cut his flesh into strips with red-hot saws, and after that he boiled him
in a cauldron over a fire, but God raised him up whole and uninjured. And when he was
tired of torturing him he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head, and they cut off his
head with a sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. And great miracles took place through his body, which healed all those who were
sick. Salutation to ‘Adonina the martyr.
And on this day also Saint Abba Isaac became a martyr. This saint was a man of the city
of Samama (Samma), and he was a gardener, and he was an excellent man, gentle, and
devoted to God. He ate no flesh, he drank no wine, he fasted two days at a time, he ate
herbs, and he visited the poor and needy, and gave them what was left of his wages. And
our Lord appeared unto him in a vision, and commanded him to go to the governor, and
confess His Name before him. And our Lord promised him many things, and told him of
the crowns which were prepared for him, and the saint rejoiced exceedingly. And he rose
up and gave what was left in his house to the poor and needy, and then he prayed and
asked God to help him. And he came to the governor, and confessed God the Most High
before him, and the governor tortured him severely, and burned him with fire, and hacked
off his limbs, and hanged him, and broke him on the wheel; but God gave him strength to
endure under all this torture, and He raised him up sound and uninjured. When he was
tired of torturing him the governor commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the
sword, and thus he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And
men of the city of Samama came and took his body, and wrapped it in splendid cloths, and
laid him in a fair place until the end of the days of persecution. [Then] they built a
beautiful church for him, and laid his body therein, and great signs and miracles appeared
through it, and healings for many sick folk. Salutation to Isaac, the gardener.
And on this day also Liyarya (Hilaria) became a martyr. This saint was a native of the city
of Lemdeya (Demyal), which is nigh unto the city of Demera, and her parents were
664

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
believers and were excellent folk; and she herself was chaste both in mind and in body, and
she fasted and prayed continually. When her days were eleven years, and she was living
and doing her work, our Lord Jesus Christ revealed to her a great light, and the Archangel
Fanuel appeared, and said unto her, “Why sittest thou here doing nothing but fighting the
spiritual fight whilst the crowns which are prepared for those who fight for the Name of
Christ, our Lord, [are waiting for thee]?” And when she heard this she rose up, and gave
all her goods to the poor and needy, and departed to Tuw, and thence to the city of Sarsana,
and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor. And there was a certain holy
man, whose name was Abba Sinoda, and our Lord Jesus Christ had appeared unto him, and
informed him concerning this holy woman, and what would become of her; and when he
saw her he rejoiced in her, and comforted her and strengthened her heart. And the
governor tortured her severely, and he made gashes in all her body, and drove red-hot iron
pegs into her; and after this he bound her with seven thousand, six hundred martyrs. Then
he took her with him in a ship and departed. And whilst they were on the ship, a fish rose
up and snatched away a child from his mother, and she had no other child, and she wept
and lamented for her son exceedingly. And the saint had compassion upon her, and prayed
to God on her behalf, and then our Lord commanded the fish to give back the child, and
the fish gave him back to his mother, alive, and no harm had befallen him. And when the
governor arrived in the city of Tuw, he commanded the soldiers to put the saint in the
furnace of the public baths, and they did as he commanded, but no harm came to her. And
then they hacked off her limbs, and cast her into the fire, and they plucked out the nails of
her hands and feet, and cut out her tongue, and drove iron pegs through her feet; after this,
they made her to lie on an iron bed, and lighted a fire under her. And when he was tired of
torturing her, he commanded the soldiers to cut off her head, and thus she received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Telyarya (Hilaria), and
salutation to those who were martyred with her.
And on this day also Thecla and Mugi, from the city of Kayrakus, on the border of
Bahyara (Bahraya) by the city of Alexandria, became martyrs. These saints were brought
up by a God-fearing teaching woman in the city of Karakus, and as they were sailing on
the river one showed them the governor torturing Christian folk, and they marveled at his
hard-heartedness; these saints were those who endured his torture. And the angel of God
appeared unto the saints, and showed them the glory of the saints, and strengthened them,
and the angel sailed with them on the ship to the city of Alexandria. And our holy Lady,
the two-fold Virgin, Mary, the God-bearer, and Elisabeth, appeared unto her in the forms
of two women, and they wept with them. And when they came unto the city of
Alexandria, they confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor, who tortured them
severely. And they cut off the head of Saint Mugi with the sword, and she received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens; and the governor sent Saint Thecla to
the city of Demow, where she became a martyr. Salutation to Thecla and Mugi.
And on this day also Saint Abba Karazun became a martyr. This saint was a man from the
city of Banwan, and he was formerly a thief, and there were with him two other young men
who were thieves. And they went to the cell of a certain monk in the desert of Scete to
steal his goods, and they found him keeping vigil and standing up in prayer; so they waited
until he had finished his prayer and had lain down. Now that monk never slept, and their
hearts were afraid and dismayed. And when the time of dawn came, the elder monk went
out to the thieves, and when they saw him they bowed down at his feet, and cast down
their swords before him, and became monks under his direction. And this saint fought a
665

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
very great fight, and devoted himself to the ascetic life, both soul and body, and a certain
elder monk prophesied and informed him that he would, assuredly, become a martyr for
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And when seven years had passed by, Satan brought
tribulation on the churches and on the Christian people. And this saint embraced his
spiritual father, and received his blessing, and departed to the city of Nakyos, where he
found the Emperor Maximianus; and he confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the
governor. And the governor tortured him severely, and sawed his body with iron saws,
and rubbed into his wounds vinegar mixed with salt; and then he took him to the city of
Alexandria, and hung him up on the mast of the ship five times; and the ropes broke. And
then he cast him into a vessel made of hide, and threw him into the sea (or, river), but the
angel of God brought him out of the sea, and commanded him to go to the city of
Gamnudi. And he departed and came to the city of Benwani, and the people asked him
about Abba Karazun, for they did not recognize him. And they said unto him, “Abuna
Abba Karazun departed many days ago, and we do not know where he is, and we have had
no news of him.” And a certain maiden recognized him and knew him, and by reason of
her great fear she fell down and broke her water jar. And she said unto the people, “This
man is Abba Karazun himself,” and all the men of the city made haste to go to him, and
they were blessed by him. And every man who was sick came to him, and the saint
besought God and prayed over some oil, and anointed him therewith, and they were
healed. And then he went to the city of Gamnudi, and he said unto a soldier, “I am a
Christian, bind me and drag me into this city”; and the soldier did as the saint commanded
him. And when he had brought him thither, the governor hanged him on a tree, head
downwards, for ten days; and the blood flowed down from his mouth and nose upon the
ground. And Abba Karazun cursed the daughter of the general, and she died and remained
in her grave for eighteen days, and the people came and besought the saint on her behalf.
And he prayed and entreated our Lord Jesus Christ, and He raised up the maiden from the
dead, and she told them what she had seen of the Judgment in hell. And Justus the general,
and his wife, believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and all his soldiers, and they became
martyrs; and they were in number nine hundred, and thirty, and five souls. And after this
the governor sent Abba Karazun to the city of Alexandria, and when he arrived there they
tortured him very severely. And he also sent him to the city of Gamnudi, where they beat
him with bars of wood and broke his back; and when he was tired of torturing him he sent
him to the city of Alexandria. And when the saint came to the Hill of Barmuda, our Lord
Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, appeared unto him, and comforted him, and told him that he
should finish his fight there, and He promised him that He would grant to every man any
request, which he should make in his name. And when the governor was tired of torturing
him he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and thus the saint
finished his martyrdom, and received the crown thereof in the kingdom of the heavens.
And the angel of God appeared unto a certain priest of the men of the city of Manuf, and
told him where the place was wherein the body of Saint Abba Karazun lay, and
commanded him to take it away. And that priest went and took the body of the saint, and
wrapped it up in beautiful cloths, [and kept it] until the end of the days of persecution.
And they built a beautiful church for him in the city of Benwan and laid his body therein,
and many miracles and wonders took place through it. Salutation to Abba Karazun.
Salutation to the nine hundred and thirty-five people who were martyred with Abba
Karazun.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of seven thousand, three hundred
martyrs. [In the Bodleian MS. seventy-six thousand.]
666

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also Saint Ladimadyos, the Syrian, became a martyr. This saint was
brought up with the Persians, and learned from them the knowledge of the stars; and he
wished to become a Christian. And he found a certain Persian priest in the bazaar, whose
name was ‘Engalius, and he taught him the Law of God and rejoiced in him exceedingly;
and he began to teach the men of his house to turn to God and to believe in Him. And then
he went to a certain city between Syria and Rome, and was there baptized with Christian
baptism. He became a monk, and fought a great, and superhuman fight; and the brethren
were jealous of him when they saw his fight; and they wished to drive him away from the
mountains. When he knew this he went forth from that place and departed to a city on the
borders of [the city of] Theodosius, and he came to the monastery of Saint Sergius; where
he lived with an elder anchorite for a year, and fought the fight. And he ate neither beans,
nor any food with fat therein. And the elder anchorite urged the abbot to make
Ladimadyos a deacon, so that he might minister with him in the sanctuary; and being
unable to resist him, he was made a deacon, and ministered with him in the sanctuary.
And when the elder went into the altar at the consecration of the Offering, during the
consecration, he saw a white dove of most beautiful appearance, and it came near and
descended upon the altar. And Ladimadyos, thinking that it was a dove of flesh, was afraid
lest the chalice should be overturned, and he made a motion with his hand, and drove the
dove off; now the elder anchorite did not see the dove. And after the Service was ended,
the anchorite asked him, saying, “What happened to disturb thee at the time of the
Offering, when thou didst stretch out thine hand over the altar?” And Ladimadyos told
him how he had seen the dove. And the anchorite said unto him, “In future when thou
seest the dove tell me.” And when the elder went up to the altar to receive the Offering,
and the time for seeing the dove came, Ladimadyos said unto him, “That dove hath come”;
and the elder did not see it, and again he was exceedingly sorry. And he bowed low before
God, and he prayed continually, and entreated Him with tears by night and by day, until he
saw that dove; and he knew that it was the grace of the Holy Spirit; but he told Saint
Ladimadyos nothing, so that he might not be puffed up in his heart. And after this the
anchorite went to the bishop, and asked him to make Ladimadyos a priest, now
Ladimadyos himself knew nothing about this, until he took him and made him a priest
against his will. And when the Archbishop of that country heard the story of his fight, he
took some people with him, and wanted to go with them to him, and to receive a blessing
from him. And Saint Ladimadyos knew of this by the Holy Ghost, and he fled secretly,
and came to the church of Saint Mark, the martyr, and then he departed and dwelt in the
desert, where he lived on grass, and God, the Most High, performed great miracles [by his
hands]. And then he fled from the vain praise of man to the seashore. And one day he
took the water-pot, and went down to the river to draw water, and he saw women there
drawing water, and they laughed at him, and made a mock of him; and he went back
without having drawn water, and with sorrow in his heart. And he asked God to dry up
that river, and God, the Most High, heard his petition, and He made the river a road
whereon men could travel. And when the people knew that it was Saint Ladimadyos who
had dried up the river, they all went up to him with their wives, and their children, and they
entreated him with many tears, until he prayed to our Lord Jesus Christ Who gave them
back the river, and it became as it was formerly. And when he saw the people wishing to
honor him, he fled from that place and went to another desert, and he lived therein a year,
fighting the fight, and enduring the cold of winter, and the heat of summer, under the sky
without a roof. And with great difficulty the people forced him to let them build him an
abode, and he dwelt therein, and God, the Most High, performed many signs and miracles
667

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
by his hands, and among them was the following: There was a certain man who was blind
in one eye, and when he was being blessed by him the hand of the saint rested upon the
blind eye of that man, and his eye was opened straightway, and he saw. And another man,
a paralytic, they brought to him, and he prayed over some oil and water, and anointed him
therewith, and the man recovered. Another man, one who was dumb, when they brought
him to him, the saint knew that this sickness had come upon the man because of the sin
which he had committed; and then he prayed to God, the Most High, and He healed him by
his hands. And again, a certain rich man came to him with his wife, who was barren, and
the saint prayed to our Lord Jesus Christ, and He gave them children, whom they brought
to him, and he blessed them. And this Saint Abba Ladimadyos performed countless
miracles. And it came to pass in his days that the Emperor Walitos, the infidel and
idolater, came to the city of Antioch, and he pulled down the churches which Constantine
had builded. And then he heard that the Persians had come to fight against him, and when
they (the Romans) had departed thither, they passed by the habitation of Saint Ladimadyos,
and one told the emperor about him. And the soldiers stoned him, and his disciple, with
stones, until a great heap of stones stood over their cave. And thus died Ladimadyos and
his disciple. And after one year God revealed his body to a certain man, who was a
merchant, and was traveling that way, now he had a laden camel with him, and the camel
fell down, and sank into a pit in the ground. And when the men came to take up the camel,
God showed him the cave, and he and his men knew that it was the cave of Saint
Ladimadyos; and they dug and took up the body of the saint, and that of his disciple, with
great honor. On the fifteenth day of the month of Hamle, on the day whereon he died, they
built a church for Saint Ladimadyos, and they laid therein his body, and that of his
disciple; and God made manifest many signs and miracles there from. Salutation to
Ladimadyos.
Salutation to ‘Atrabius, who took the place of Pachomius.
And on this day also are commemorated the Seven Thousand Martyrs of Athribis, and
Amon and Mary. Salutation to the Seven Thousand Martyrs of Athribis.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 26
(August 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died at a good old age the righteous man Joseph, the carpenter, who was
worthy to be called the father of Christ in the flesh, and concerning whom the Holy Gospel
beareth witness that he was a righteous man, and that, because of this, our Lady Saint Mary
was in safe keeping with him. And he finished his fight, and his course, and his toil, and
his journey, together with our Lady Mary and our Lord Jesus Christ, in his coming to
Bethlehem, and [his] flight to the country of Egypt. On his return from the country of
Egypt there came [upon him] tribulation from the Jews. And when the time came for him
to depart from this transient world to the world of the Living, [he called to him] his other
sons, that is to say, Justus, and Judah, and Josa, and Jacob, and his three daughters, and he
668

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
gave them commandments and embraced them, and stretched out his hands and delivered
up his soul into the hand of God, and inherited everlasting life. And all the days of his life
were one hundred and fourteen years; he lived before his marriage forty years, and after his
marriage fifty-two years, and after his wife died, nineteen years, and three years before the
Incarnation of our Redeemer. And our Lord Jesus Christ came to him at the time of his
death, and laid His hand upon his eyes and wept over him, and He bestowed upon his body
the gracious gift of never growing old, and upon his bones the gift of incorruptibility. And
they laid him in the grave of Jacob, his father, in the tenth year of the Incarnation of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Salutation to Joseph and Mary.
And on this day also died the holy father, Abba Timothy, the twenty-second Archbishop of
the city of Alexandria. This saint was the brother of the Archbishop Saint Peter his
predecessor, and having been appointed he shepherded the rational flock of Christ and
guarded them from the wolves Arius, and Macedonius, and Sabelius. In the sixth year of
the archiepiscopate of this saint the Emperor Theodosius the Great [began to] reign over
the Christian people. In that year also took place the General Council whereat One
hundred and Fifty bishops gathered together in the city of Constantinople on account of
Macedonius, who had denied the Holy Spirit; and this father was president of the Council.
Now Saint Damalius, Archbishop of the city of Rome, did not come to the Council because
of his illness, but he sent priests in his place. And this holy father Timothy disputed with
Macedonius, who denied the Holy Ghost, and with Sabelius and with Apollinarius, and he
overcame them, and put them to shame. And behold, we have described their denial, and
how this saint disputed with them, [in the section of this work] relating to the days of the
assembling of this Council, which is the first day of the month of Yekatit. And during the
archiepiscopate of this saint, he took great care concerning the buildings of the churches,
and he built many churches in the city of Alexandria and outside it, and he repaired and
restored many of them; and he built many cells for the churches (?), and for the pilgrims.
And he was teaching his flock much doctrine continually, and by means of his great
knowledge he strengthened them in the True Faith, and by the sweetness of his voice and
his reading. And he converted many of the followers of Arius and Macedonius, and
brought them into the True Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he sat upon the throne of
Mark the evangelist for nine years and a half, and he died in peace. Salutation to Timothy
the archbishop, brother of Peter the archbishop.
And on this day also died Abba Selama, the Revealer of the Light, the Bishop of Ethiopia;
now his history is as follows: A certain man from the country of the Greeks, a master of
learning, whose name was Merpes, came wishing to see the country of Ethiopia, and he
had with him two youths of his family, and the name of one was Fremnatos (Frumentius),
and that of the other was “Adesyos (Aedesius)”; now there are some who call him
“Sidrakos.” And he arrived in a ship at the shore of the Sea of Ethiopia, and he saw all the
beautiful things, which his heart desired, and as he was wishing to return to his country,
enemies rose up against him and killed him, and all those who were with him. And these
two youths were left [alive], and the men of the city made them captives, and taught them
the work of war, and took them as a present to the King of ‘Aksum whose name was
“Alameda.” And the king made Adyos director of his household, and Fremnatos, keeper
of the Laws and Archives of “Aksum; and after a few days the king died, and left a little
son with his mother, and the ‘Azgaga reigned with him. And ‘Adesyos and Fremnatos
brought up the children, and taught them little by little the Faith of Christ, and they built
for them a place of prayer, and they gathered together to it the children and they taught
669

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
them psalms and hymns. And when they had brought the boy to the stage of early
manhood, they asked him to dismiss them to their native country; and Adyoses departed to
the country of Tyre to see his kinsfolk, and Fremnatos departed to Alexandria, to the
Archbishop Athanasius, and he found that he had been restored to his office. And he
related everything, which had happened unto him because of their Faith in the country of
Ethiopia, and how the people believed on Christ, but had neither bishops nor priests. And
then Abba Athanasius appointed Fremnatos Bishop of the country of Ethiopia, and sent
him away with great honor. And he arrived in the country of Ethiopia during the reign of
‘Abreha and ‘Asbeha, and he preached the peace of Christ in all the regions thereof, and
because of this he was called “Abba Selama.” And after he had saluted the men of
Ethiopia he died in peace. Salutation, salutation, I say, with joyful voice to Abba Selama.
And on this day also is commemorated the blessed Saint Abba Roys.
Salutation to Samuel and Zacharias.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 27
(August 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Abba Ammon, of the city of Tarnut, became a martyr. This saint came
to Upper Egypt, and he saw the tortures, which were being inflicted upon the holy martyrs,
and he went to Arianus, the governor of Antinoe, and confessed our Lord Jesus Christ
before him. And Arianus tortured him severely, and beat him, and hanged him, and cut
gashes in all his body, and drove long, sharp nails through his body; and our Lord Jesus
Christ gave him strength, and healed his wounds, and raised him up from the punishment,
whole and uninjured. And after this Arianus sent him to the city of Alexandria. And our
Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him, and strengthened him, and promised him, saying,
“Whosoever shall celebrate thy commemoration, or shall write [a copy of] the book of thy
fight, or shall cause it to be read, or shall give bread and water to the poor on the day of thy
commemoration, I will blot out their sins and write their names in the Book of Life in the
kingdom of the heavens”; and having said this unto him our Lord Jesus Christ went up into
heaven with glory. And Saint Abba Ammon rejoiced with great joy. And then the
governor tortured him very severely, and very many men believed through him and
became martyrs. And among them was a certain young woman, a virgin, whose name was
Theophila, and she came and stood up before the governor, and cursed him and his idols,
and she confessed our Lord Jesus Christ. And the governor commanded the soldiers to
cast her into the fire, but God delivered her from the fire; and they cut off her head with the
sword, and she received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Then the
governor tortured Abba Ammon with great severity, and he mutilated him, and after this he
commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword; [and they did so,] and he
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And many signs and
miracles, and great healings of the sick, took place through his body. Salutation to
Ammon.
670

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also are commemorated the vision which Ezekiel the prophet saw; and the
dedication of the church of Saint John the evangelist in the city of Alexandria, and the
honorable father Abba Simon, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, that is to say, the
translation of his body to the monastery of Abba Macarius of the desert of Scete; and the
death of Seth, the son of Adam. Salutation to the translation of thy body, O Simon.
Salutation to the vision of Ezekiel.
Salutation to Bifamon.
Salutation to the holy woman Meskel Kibra.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 28
(August 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And on this day also are commemorated Andronicus and his wife Athanasia, the lovers of
God. They came from the city of Antioch. They were rich in gold and in silver, and they
gave one half of the profit, which they made on their money to the poor; and after a few
days they produced two children, a boy and a girl, and they called their names John and
Mary. And then Andronicus and Athanasia took counsel together, and agreed to cease to
live together as man and wife, and they began to devote their money and themselves to
ministering to the sick and needy, that is to say, he ministered to the men, and she
ministered to the women; and they continued to do this for twelve years. And then their
children fell ill of the plague, and they both died on one day. And when Andronicus saw
[this] he fell upon the ground, and he cast himself before the picture of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and wept, saying, “Naked was I when I came forth from my mother’s womb, and
naked shall I be when I go to God; God gave, God took away, blessed be the Name of God
for ever.” And their mother, in the intensity of her grief, wanted to kill herself, and
weeping she came into the sanctuary to the place where her children were buried. And
during the night she saw, as it were, a monk who said unto her, “Weep not for the death of
thy children, but weep for thyself, for thy children are rejoicing in the kingdom of the
heavens.” And when she heard this she went and told her husband, and they decided to
renounce the world. And they distributed their money among the poor and needy, and
went forth by night, and came to Alexandria, and Andronicus left his wife there and
departed to the desert of Scete, and became a monk with Abba Daniel; then he went back
and took his wife to Upper Egypt, and placed her in a house of virgins and left her there.
And when Andronicus had lived with Abba Daniel for twelve years, he asked that he might
go to Jerusalem so that he might be blessed in the holy places. And whilst he was on the
road thither, behold, by the Will of God, his wife met him, for she also wished to receive a
blessing in the holy places. Now, by reason of her labor and vigil her face had become so
changed that he did not know her, but she knew him because his face had not changed.
And having visited the holy places they returned to the city of Alexandria. And Abba
Daniel had knowledge by the Holy Spirit, and he said unto Andronicus, “Dwell in a place
with that monk who hath been thy companion, for he is holy”; and they dwelt [there]
671

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
twelve years, and there was none who knew that the companion of Andronicus was a
woman, but they called her “Athanasia.” And Abba Daniel visited them on one occasion,
and spoke to them concerning the profit of their souls. And Athanasia having fallen sick,
Andronicus went to Abba Daniel and said unto him, “My companion is going to die, come
and visit him.” When Abba Daniel arrived he found that she was very ill, and she said
unto him, “Abba, I want thee to administer unto me the Offering.” and Abba Daniel
devoted himself to the matter, and administered unto her the Holy Mysteries, and she died
straightway; and there rose up a sweet odor and filled the place. And when Andronicus
want to wrap her up for burial, he discovered by her hair that she was a woman; and they
found on the body a paper whereon her history was written, and a token which she left to
her husband. And when Andronicus had read the paper, and knew that she was his wife,
his mind became obscured, and he began to beat his face and to lament. And after a few
days, now, he had become sick, the elders came and received his blessing, and having
received the Offering, he died and entered into the kingdom of heaven. Salutation to
Andronicus. Salutation to Athanasia.
Salutation to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the elders of Israel.
Salutation to Meskel Kibra.
And on this day also died the blessed man, the fighter, and the worker of wonders, Abba
Philip, father of the Council of the holy city of Debre Libanos. Of this holy man it was
reported that he used to work signs and wonders. And by the Will of God he came to his
native place in the interior of the desert, in the days when Abuna Takla Haymanot lived
there, to be his son, and that saint received him joyfully and he knew, by the spirit, that he
was to be a chosen vessel. And after he had tried him with spiritual exercises of all kinds,
he arrayed him in the garb of the monk. And Abba Philip fought the fight, and made
himself to be like unto Takla Haymanot. And when Abba Takla Haymanot died, Philip
was set upon the throne of Abba Elisha. After a little [time] one of the sons of the Abuna
died, and when they wanted to wrap him up in cloths for burial, he moved himself and
spoke, saying, “Abuna Takla Haymanot, Elisha shall come to me, and Philip shall sit upon
thy throne”; and having said this he died. And then they appointed Philip to be the Abuna.
And he followed a right course, like his father, and he received beatings and tribulations, as
he ministered for righteousness’ sake; and he died under persecution (or, in exile), and he
departed to God, bearing the crown of praise. Salutation to Philip.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 29
(August 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the Birth of our Lord, and God, and Redeemer,
Jesus Christ. Salutation to Thy Birth, O our Redeemer.
And on this day also is celebrated the festival of the translation of the body of Saint
Thaddeus, the apostle, from the country of Syria to the city of Constantinople. The
672

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
righteous and Christ-loving Emperor Constantine had it translated, and he built a beautiful
church, and consecrated it, as it were this day, and laid Thaddeus within it; and many signs
and miracles appeared through his body. Salutation to the translation of thy body, O
Thaddeus.
And on this day also Saint Warestefa became a martyr. This saint was a learned, and
orthodox, and kindly ascetic. The people wanted to make him a bishop but he fled from
them, and having come to a certain city he dwelt with two Christ-loving brethren. And the
angel of God appeared unto him, and commanded him to confess our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to receive the crown of martyrdom. When he awoke from his sleep he told the
brethren what he had seen, and they all agreed together and went to the governor and
confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before him. And the governor tortured them severely, and
then cast them into prison until he went to the city of Senhur, when he took them with him,
and again tortured them there severely. And at the time when he was torturing them the
angel of God appeared unto them, and strengthened them, and enabled them to endure, and
healed their wounds; and after this the governor took them to the city of Dha and tortured
them there. And then the governor gathered together many confessors, and had read to
them the roll containing the Edict of the emperor in respect of the worship of idols; and
this Saint Warestefa seized the roll, and tore it in pieces. And the governor was
exceedingly wroth, and he commanded the soldiers to heat a furnace red-hot and to cast the
saint therein, and they did as the governor commanded, and thus he finished his martyrdom
in the furnace, And as for the other two brethren the soldiers cut off their heads with the
sword and the saints received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens.
Salutation to Waresnos.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Hamle 30
(August 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Mercurius and Ephraim, the holy Galileans, became martyrs. These saints
were loving brethren in the spirit, and kinsmen in the flesh, and they were of the men of
the city of ‘Akmim. They made an agreement together in the spirit, and they became
monks in the same monastery in Upper Egypt, and they lived therein fighting the fight with
fasting, and prayer, and prostrations and vigils, for a period of twenty years. And Satan,
the Enemy, brought tribulation upon the churches, through the followers of Arius, who
denied [Christ]; and they came, by the commandment of the Emperor Constantine, to
administer the temples of the Orthodox. And these saints rose up and came into the church
and cast aside the bread which the wicked Arians, the deniers of Christ, had laid there, and
they said unto the people, “He who hath not been baptized in the Name of the Holy Trinity
is only fit to offer up an offering on the altar of idols.” And the Arians seized the saints
and beat them very severely, and the soldiers threw them down upon the ground and
trampled upon them with their feet until their members and their bones were broken. And
they delivered their souls into the hand of our Lord Jesus Christ and received the crown of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And certain believing men came, and they took
673

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the bodies of the saints, and wrapped them up in cloths, and laid them in a fair place.
Salutation to Mercurius and Ephraim.
And on this day also took place the translation of the body of Abba Timothy, Archbishop
of the city of Alexandria, from Mesr (Cairo) to the monastery of Abba Macarius in the
desert of Scete.
And on this day also died the blessed Paul, the monk. It is related of this renouncer of the
world that he enjoyed in this world honor and high rank, and that he had a wife, who was a
saint, and blessed children, and that he was exceedingly rich. And he wanted to become a
monk. And he called his wife and his children, and said unto them, “Behold, I want to sell
you for Christ’s sake”; and they said unto him, “Thou art our god, do what thou wishest.”
And he took his wife, and his sons, and his possessions, and distributed all his money
among the poor, and he came to a house for women, and he sought out the abbess and said
unto her, “I want to sell thee this woman”; and she agreed to what he wanted. And he
wrote the bill of the sale, and handed her over to the abbess, together with what was with
her; and she became a nun. And he took his sons to another religious house, and he did
with them even as he had done with their mother, and he sold them to the archimandrite,
and handed them over to him; and then he went to another religious house and sold himself
to the abbot. And he said unto him, “I want to go into the church by myself,” and the
abbot gave him permission to do so. And he went into the church, and shut the door, and
he stood up and stretched out his hands towards heaven, and cried out with a loud voice,
saying, “O my Lord, Thou knowest that I have come unto Thee with all my heart.” And a
voice came unto him, which said, “Behold, I know this, and I have accepted thee with all
My mind.” And then he continued to perform all the hard work which had to be done in
the monastery, and he made himself the most menial of all the monks; but God exalted him
because of his humility, and many miracles appeared through him, and he died in peace.
Salutation to Paul who sold his wife, and his children, and himself for the sake of Christ.
And on this day also is commemorated the dedication of the church of Suriel the angel.
Salutation to the dedication of thine house, which the believers built in Constantinople.
And on this day Andrew the apostle performed many miracles, and some of them took
place when he was in the city of the Greeks. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto
him, saying, “Rise up and depart to Mathias (Matthew) in the Cannibal City, so that thou
mayest bring him out of prison, for the men of that city will in three days bring him out to
eat him.” And Andrew said unto our Lord, “If this will happen in three days I cannot get
there [in time to save him], therefore send an angel to bring him out of prison.” And our
Lord answered and said unto Andrew, “Hearken. If I say unto the city ‘Come to Me,’ it,
and all those who dwell therein, shall come [to Me]. And as for thee and thy disciple,
when the morrow cometh, rise up, and thou shalt find a ship which is ready to sail; embark
in it, and it shall bring thee [thither].” And He gave him the salutation “Peace” and went
up into heaven in glory. And Andrew rose up, as He had commanded him, and he came to
the seashore. And God prepared for him a beautiful ship, and He stayed with him in the
form of the captain, and there were two angels there in the forms of sailors. And Andrew
went to the ship and found our Lord, Who was disguised as the captain thereof, and he said
unto Him, “Peace be unto thee, O Captain”; and our Lord said unto him, “The peace of
God be with thee.” And Andrew said unto Him, “Whither goest thou in this ship?” And
our Lord said unto him, “To the Cannibal City.” And Andrew said unto Him, “Every man
fleeth there from and do Ye travel thither?” And the Captain said unto him, “It is
674

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
necessary for us to go thither”; and Andrew said unto Him, “I ask Thee to take me”; and
the Captain said unto him, “I agree,” and He made them to embark. And as they were
traveling on the ship with our Lord as Captain, He asked Andrew many things, and
Andrew told Him of many of the miracles of our Lord, not knowing that He was our Lord.
And after this the Captain slept, and Andrew and his disciples slept, and at that moment
our Lord commanded His angels to take up Andrew, and his two disciples, and to set them
down by the seashore. And when Andrew woke up from his dream, and looked at the
seashore, and did not find the ship, he marveled greatly; and he said unto his disciples, “O
my sons, we were in the ship with our Lord, and did not know it!” And Andrew rose up
and prayed, and our Lord appeared unto him coming out of the city in the form of a young
man with a noble countenance (or, goodly person), and He said unto him, “Andrew, My
beloved, fear not! I did this because thou didst say, ‘We cannot arrive at the city in three
days,’ and because I wished thee to know that I have power over everything, and that there
is nothing too hard for Me [to do]. Rise up, come into the city, and bring out Matthew
from prison, and all those who are with him.” And having said these words He went up
into heaven with [great] glory. And Andrew and his two disciples rose up, and came into
the city, and no one saw them. When they came to the door of the prison house wherein
was Matthew, as soon as they touched the door it opened, and they went in and found
Matthew sitting down singing; and Andrew embraced him. And Andrew said unto
Matthew, “Thou sayest that after two days they will take thee out, and slay thee like a
beast, and eat thy body; but thou hast forgotten those mysteries which we saw with our
Lord, and that when we spoke there, the heavens quaked.” And Matthew said unto him,
“Behold, I know this, O my brother, but I say that if it be the Will of our Lord, I shall come
to an end in this city. Hast thou not heard in the Holy Gospel the words, which say, ‘I send
you forth like sheep among wolves?’ But as for me, when they cast me into the prison
house I cried unto God, and He revealed Himself unto me, and He said unto me, ‘Fear not:
at the end of three days I will send unto you Andrew, and he shall bring thee out from the
prison house, thee and all those who are with thee.’ And behold thou hast come; consider
what thou wilt do.” And Andrew looked at the men who were in the prison house and
were fettered like beasts, and he began to speak and cursed Satan and all his hosts. And
Andrew and Matthew made entreaty to God, and He heard their prayer, and they laid their
hands on the men who were in the prison house, and they opened their eyes, and their
senses returned to them, and they commanded the apostles to go out from the city. And
Andrew and Matthew went out on the city road, and they sat down until they knew what
would happen. And the men of the city came to the prison house to roast those who were
bound therein, and to devour them according to their custom, and they found the gates of
the prison house open, and the prisoners not there. And they said, “Woe be unto us! What
hath come upon us?” And Satan took the form of a man and spoke unto the men of the
city, and the people ran with eagerness and seized Andrew and Matthew, and dragged them
along the road of the city, until their blood ran out of them like water, and then they cast
them into prison. And the apostles prayed to God, and when they had finished their prayer
they drew nigh unto a pillar on which was an image, and they said unto it, “Be afraid of the
sign of the Cross which we make over thee, and pour out from beneath thee water in a vast
quantity, like unto a flood, upon this city and upon all those who dwell therein.” And there
sprang up from beneath it a vast quantity of water, which was exceedingly bitter and like
salt, and it threatened to sweep away the city, and all those who were in it. And the men of
the city took up their children, and their parents, and wanted to flee there from, but the
pillar poured forth more and more water until it reached the necks of the people, and was
675

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
about to drown them. And they wept, saying, “Woe be unto us! This wrath hath come
upon us because of the two excellent men who are servants of God; we will believe in their
God.” And Andrew said unto the pillar, “Hold, enough! Behold, the time of the flood hath
passed, and the time for sowing seed in the hearts of the men of this city hath come. It is
the truth, which I speak unto thee. When I have built a church in this city, I will set thee in
it, and they shall decorate thee”; and the water which was flowing from under the image
stood (i.e. ceased). And when the men of the city saw that the water had stopped, they
went to the apostles and walked with them, and the water receded before them. And the
apostles stretched out their hands, and prayed to God, and the earth opened and swallowed
up the men who were in the habit of slaying people; and when the multitude saw this they
were afraid. And the apostles said unto them, “Fear not, but believe in God, we will not
forsake you until we have given you life.” And the apostles prayed again, and they raised
from the dead those who had died in the water, and those whom the earth had swallowed
up, and they baptized in that water all the men of the city, in the Name of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Ghost. And they administered unto them the Holy Mysteries, and
built them a church, and said unto them, “Observe the commandments which we give you
until the end of your days, and teach them unto you children who shall come after you, and
entreat God to remove from you the laxity which is caused by eating the flesh of men, and
to give you understanding so that ye may eat the food of men.” And the apostles
performed many miracles and wonders, and they healed many sick folk, and then departed
from that city. And Andrew departed to the country of the Greeks with his two disciples.
Salutation to Andrew and Matthew.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

676

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE TWELVETH MONTH
Nehasse 01
(August 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the blessed Saint Abba ‘Aboli, the son of Justus, became a martyr. To this
holy man belonged the kingdom of Rome. When he had fought in the war, and returned to
the city of Antioch, he found that Diocletian had denied Christ, and had set up the worship
of idols. He was able to destroy Diocletian and to take his kingdom from him, but he
meditated upon a heavenly kingdom, which never passeth away; and Diocletian urged him,
with many persuasive words, [to worship idols,] but he would not hearken unto him. And
after this Justus urged the saint, until Diocletian wrote the order, and sent it to Justus, and
his wife Theoklera, and his son ‘Aboli, who is commemorated this day, and he sent them
to the country of Egypt, to Herminius, governor of the city of Alexandria, and he said in
his letter, “When Justus, and his wife, and his son ‘Aboli arrive, persuade them to offer
sacrifice to the gods, and if they will not do so, separate them from each other, and send
them each alone into the city.” And that night our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto Justus
and his wife, and his son, and comforted them and encouraged them, and He told them
what was going to happen to them, and He promised [to receive] them in His heavenly
abode. And when they arrived in the city of Alexandria, and Herminius the governor saw
them, he marveled greatly at them, and wondered why they had forsaken their royal
position. And the governor did not dare to speak abusive words to them, but he addressed
them with words of courtesy, and persuaded them earnestly to return to their honorable
estate; but they would not hearken unto him. And straightway he became filled with wrath
at Justus, and he separated them from each other; Justus he sent to the city of Antinoe, and
his wife to the city of Sa, and his son ‘Aboli to the city of Basta; and he gave to each of
them one of their servants to minister unto them. And when Abba ‘Aboli had arrived in
the city of Basta, he confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor, who tortured him
severely, and burnt him with fire, and put him on the wheel, and cut off his limbs, and cast
him to the lions. And God gave him strength, and delivered him, and raised him up whole
and uninjured from the tortures. And when many of the men who were there saw what
happened to Saint ‘Aboli, after the torturing, they marveled exceedingly, and they believed
on our Lord Jesus Christ and became martyrs. And the governor was wroth with the saint,
and he commanded his soldiers to flay off his skin, and to dip rags of sackcloth in vinegar
and salt, and to rub all his wounds therewith; [and they did so,] and then they laid his skin
upon his shoulders, and took him round through all the city. And the saint prayed and said,
“O my Lord Jesus Christ, Thou Son of the Living God, help me and deliver me from this
tribulation”; and forthwith the angel Michael came to him, and touched his body, and
healed his wounds; and the governor commanded the soldiers to take him into the prison
house until he could decide what he should do with him. And the saint stood up and
prayed in prison, and whilst he was praying our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him, and
He said unto him, “Peace be unto thee, O My chosen one ‘Aboli, be strong and fear not,
for I will be with thee until the end of thy fight”; and when He had said this unto him He
went up into heaven in great glory. And Saint ‘Aboli rejoiced with a great joy when he
saw our Lord Jesus Christ. And there was a certain rich man whose name was ‘Abskiron,
677

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and who had two sons, and he brought some workmen to pull down the wall of his house
and to rebuild it; and he commanded his two sons to stand by them until they finished their
work. And when the workmen went up on the wall it fell down and killed twelve of the
workmen, and the two sons of the rich man; and when the rich man heard what had
happened he rent his garments, and cried out and wept. And he went to Saint Abba ‘Aboli,
and bowed low at his feet and said unto him, “Have compassion upon me, for my two sons
are dead with the seventeen (sic) workmen, if thou wilt raise them up from the dead I will
believe on thy God.” And when he had said this unto him, the holy man rose up and
prayed, saying, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, Who hast chosen me to suffer for Thy holy
Name’s sake, do Thou make manifest Thy power over the men who are dead, and raise
them up from the dead, so that all men may believe, and that all men may know that there
is no other God beside Thee; for Thine is the glory for ever and ever. Amen.” And he
took his skin and spread it out over those men, saying, “In the Name of my Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Living God, do ye all rise up alive”; and he took them by their hands,
and raised them up, and all the people were looking on. And straightway they all cried out,
saying, “One is the God of the Christians, Jesus Christ, the God of Saint ‘Aboli.” And
straightway ‘Abskiron bowed down before the saint, saying, “Now do I know that Jesus
Christ is the Great God: I believe on Him”: and all the men of his house believed with
him, and the governor was put to shame. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto the
saint and made him a promise, saying, “O My chosen one ‘Aboli, whosoever shall ask Me
for help in thy name when tribulation cometh upon him, I will hear his prayer and will
fulfill all his petition and desire. And I will make to dwell in My kingdom whosoever shall
build a church in thy name. And I will write upon the lips of the four beasts, and I will
make to rest in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and will make to eat of the dainty
things of the Garden of Delight, every one who shall write down the story of thy fight, or
shall read it, or shall make someone else to hear it. And even if he hath committed many
sins, but doth repent, I will forgive him his sins. And I will forgive the sins of every one
who shall feed the hungry in thy name, and I will make him to eat of the fruits of the
Garden; and My peace shall be with thee. Amen.” And when our Redeemer had said
these things unto him, He gave him the salutation “Peace,” and went up into heaven with
great glory. And when the governor became tired of torturing him he commanded the
soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and they cut off his holy head with the sword,
and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And his body
resteth in the monastery of Handak, outside the city of Mesr (Cairo), and many signs and
wonders take place through it, and great healings. Salutation to ‘Aboli. Salutation to you,
O ye company of two hundred and forty men and women who were tortured and beheaded
with Saint ‘Aboli.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Hannah, the mother of our Lady Mary, and
Hannah the prophetess, the daughter of Panuel.
Salutation to the three virgins Pistis (Faith), ‘Alapis (Hope), and ‘Agapis (Charity), who
suffered martyrdom, but whose beauty was unspoiled by the smoke, and whose bodies
were unconsumed by the fire.
And the fathers have commanded that on this day the people shall celebrate the
commemoration of the honorable men Joseph and Nicodemus, who were held to be worthy
to become ministers of the Divine Mystery. And they brought down from the Cross the
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, when He had fulfilled the Law
678

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
of the Incarnation in every respect, with the exception of sin, and He had accepted
suffering and death for the sake of the salvation of the [world]. So little did the terror of
the Jews frighten them that they asked Pilate to give them His Body, and when Pilate gave
them permission to carry Him away, they took Him down from the Cross, having
withdrawn the nails from out of His hands, and His feet, and they bore Him away on their
shoulders. And they heard a voice which came forth from His dead Body, saying, “Holy is
the Lord, Holy is the Power, Holy is the Life Which dieth not, and which the holy Virgin
Mary bore! Have compassion upon us, O Lord. Holy is the Lord, Holy is the Power, Holy
is the Life Which dieth not, which was baptized in the Jordan, and was hung upon the
wood of the Cross. Have compassion upon us, O Lord. Holy is the Lord, Holy is the
Power, Holy is the Life Which dieth not, Which was raised up from the dead on the third
day, Who went up into heaven with praise and sat down on the right hand of His Father,
Who shall come again to judge the living and the dead. Have compassion upon us, O
Lord. Glory be to the Father. Glory be to the Son. Glory be to the Holy Spirit, now and
henceforth and forever. Amen. So be it! So be it!” And when they heard this their Faith
in Christ was strengthened. And Joseph brought linen cloths, and Nicodemus brought
perfumed unguents, and they wrapped our Lord in them, and buried Him in a new grave.
And this Joseph was kinsman to Nicodemus, the brother of Cleophas, the kinsman of
Stephen the martyr. And Nicodemus was the Phrisee, and the legate of the Jews, who went
by night to our Lord Jesus Christ, and . . . His coming from heaven. And our Lord told
him that it was impossible for a man to enter into the kingdom of the heavens, who was not
born of water and of the Holy Spirit; and Nicodemus used frequently to rebuke the Jews
when they derided the words of our Lord. And after His Resurrection, as they were
travelling along the road to Emmaus, it was these two, Cleophas and Nicodemus, whom
our Lord met; and they told Him everything which had happened in Jerusalem, without
recognizing Him. And He told them that the prophets had prophesied concerning His
Death and Resurrection; and then when they recognized Him, He disappeared from them.
And they brought His words to His disciples. And Joseph the Jews bound fast in prison,
and they wanted to kill him, because he had buried our Lord. And although the door of the
prison was sealed with the seal of Pilate, and with the seals of the high priests, our Lord
Jesus came to the place where Joseph was, and He was mounted on the chariot of the
Cherubim, and with Him there were thousands of thousands, and tens of thousands of tens
of thousands of angels, and Seraphim standing round about Him, and burning incense
before Him. And the thief who was on His right hand stood on the right of Him wearing
shining raiment, and he was making intercession for sinners, because he had found favor
before Him; and the keepers of the house were terrified, and trembling seized them. And
then our Lord cried out to Joseph and said unto him, “Be not afraid of the terrors of the
Jews. Behold I have come to unloose thy bonds. I am that Jesus, the Nazarene, in Whose
suffering thou didst participate. Look at the nail [marks] in My hands and feet, and the
mark of the spear in My side, so that thou mayest know that of a truth I am He.” Then He
caught up Joseph from that place, and took him to the city of ‘Armatyas. And the keepers
of the prison house, having gone to Pilate, told him everything, which they had seen, and
what they had heard from the mouth of our Lord, and how He had set free Joseph and
taken him away with Him. And when the high priests went [there] they found the doors of
the prison open and their seals unbroken. And these saints continued to preach the Gospel with
the Disciples, and very much tribulation came upon them; and then they died in peace. Salutation
to Joseph the rich man who begged the Body of Jesus from Pilate. Salutation to Nicodemus who
believed on the Son of Mary.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

679

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 02
(August 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Athanasia. This holy woman was a native of the city of Manuf, and
her parents were rich. When they died she arrived in her mind at the wise decision to make
her house a dwelling place for monks and pilgrims, and this she carried into effect. And
she used to receive all those who came to her, and she gave them whatsoever they needed,
and at length she came to the end of her money. And certain evil men, whose actions were
abominable, gathered together, and they corrupted her mind and induced her to commit sin,
which she used to do continually, instead of doing what was good. And the holy elders of
the desert of Scete heard the story of her, and they sorrowed for her with very great
sorrow. And they called Abba John the Short and informed him of what had happened to
her, and they asked him to go to her, and to show her affection in return for the many kind
acts, which she had done to them, and to save her soul. And he submitted unto them in this
matter, and asked them to help him by their prayers. And Saint Abba John rose up and
departed, and came to the place where Athanasia was, and he said unto the woman who
kept the door of her house, “Inform thy mistress of my arrival.” And when the woman had
informed her about the arrival of the saint, she thought that he had come to her for the
purpose of committing sin, and she adorned herself and sat upon her couch. Then she
called him, and he came unto her singing these words, “Even if I have to go amid the
shadows of death I will fear [no] evil, for Thou art with me” (Psalm xxii, 4). And when
the saint came to her she made him to sit by her side upon her bed, and he looked at her
and said unto her, “Why dost thou belittle our Lord Jesus Christ? Why hast thou forsaken
thy good deeds and turned thyself to this evil course of life?” And when she heard his
words she trembled, and she knew that her heart was melting; and the saint bowed his head
and wept. And she asked him, saying, “Why dost thou weep?” And he answered and said
unto her, “Because I see the Satans playing on thy face, and therefore I weep for thee.”
And she answered and said unto him, “Is it necessary for me to repent?” And the saint said
unto her, “Yea.” And she said unto him, “Take me away, and carry me whithersoever thou
wishest”: and he said unto her, “Come,” and she followed him, and they departed and came
into the desert. And when the eventide was come he said unto her, “Sleep by thyself,” and
after he had finished his prayer he lay down at a distance from her. And when he rose up
at midnight to pray he saw pillar of light shining upon her, and the pillar reached from
earth to heaven, and he saw the angel of God bearing away her soul. And he rose up and
went to her, and he found that she was dead, and he cast himself upon the ground and
prayed to God to give him information concerning her. And there came unto him a voice,
saying, “God accepted her repentance when she repented more readily than He did the
repentance of those who were in a state of repentance for many years, and who repented
even like her.” And Saint John went and told the holy elders everything, which had
happened unto her, and the saints came and made her ready for burial and buried her.
Salutation to Athanasia.
And on this day also are commemorated Saint Demiana and her brother.
And on this day also died Saint Eupraxia. This holy woman belonged to a race of kings.
Then name of her father, who was a royal councilor, was “’Atekhanos,” and the name of
her mother was “Eupraxia,” and they fasted, and prayed to God that He would give them a
680

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
son; and when they had gotten this saint, they called her by her mother’s name
“Eupraxia.” And after a few days her father died, and the king and queen mourned for
him, and her mother took Saint Eupraxia to a house of virgins when she was six years old.
And when she saw the beauty of the excellence of the virgins, she said unto them, “Why
do ye lead this life of service?” And they told her, saying, “It is for Christ’s sake.” And
she said unto them, “Where is Christ?” And they showed her a picture of Christ, and she
came up to it, and bowed low before it, and kissed its feet. And she went to the deacons,
and asked [them] to received her as a nun, and they told her mother, and her mother gave
her to the deaconess; and her mother, having handed her over to the care of all the virgins,
left her and departed. And after a few days Eupraxia, her mother, died, and the saint
assumed the garb of the monastic life; and she fought the spiritual fight continually and
fasted every eighth day. And Satans was envious of her, and tempted her, and sometimes
he threw her into the water, and sometimes he wounded her with the axe when she was
cutting up wood, and sometimes he poured boiling water over her, but nothing harmed
her. And she continued to minister unto the virgins, to each in her turn. Sometimes they
commanded her to tend the furnace, and sometimes to bake the bread, and sometimes to
draw water, and she never hesitated to perform these works. She never lay down upon the
ground, but stood upright for forty days at a time, until at length the virgins marveled at the
severity of her fight. And God made manifest by her hands signs and wonders, and the
sick were healed, and the devils went out, and the lame walked, and the blind saw, when
she prayed over them. And there was a certain virgin whose name was Iyalya, and it was
she who taught Eupraxis to read and to write, and the duties of the ascetic life; she was her
companion in every work, and they loved each other very much. And when she was thirty
years of age she saw a vision wherein the deacons were taking up Eupraxia into the royal
palace, wherein was the heavenly Bridegroom and never-ending joy; and when she woke
up she knew that the death of Eupraxia was nigh. And on the following day she told the
virgins, and when they went to Eupraxia they found that she was in a high fever. And they
wept over her, and asked her to pray over them, and she blessed them, and died, and she
was buried in the tomb of her mother, at whose tomb she had prayed three days before.
Salutation to Eupraxia.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 03
(August 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the glorious holy father, the ascetic and fighter, Abba Simon of the Pillar.
This saint came from the island of Sorya. When his days were three years, his father set
him to tend his sheep. And he used to go to church frequently and hear the Holy
Scriptures, and the grace of God moved him, and he went to a certain monastery and
became a monk, and devoted himself to the ascetic life and fought the spiritual fight for
many years. And he used to carry loads of dust and ashes upon his head, and he afflicted
his soul with fasting and much prayer, and with prolonged periods of thirst. And then he
tied a cord so tightly about his waist that is sank into his body, and very stinking worms
used to issue from the wound. And his brother monks were distressed at his filthy smell,
681

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and at his dirtiness, and they all gathered together and came to the abbot, and said unto
him, “If thou dost not expel this monk Simon from among us, we shall all forsake thee and
depart.” And the abbot said unto them, “What hath he done?” And they said unto him,
“Call him, and see what he hath done”; and the abbot called Saint Abba Simon. And when
Simon stood before him the abbot saw blood, mixed with pus, flowing down upon his feet,
and it was an exceedingly hard matter for the abbot. And he opened Simon’s apparel and
saw the rope, which had cut, into his flesh, and the abbot was wroth with him, and said
unto him, “Why hast thou dared to do this thing, which thou wishest to do with such toil?”
And the abbot had the rope taken off the saint’s body. And they continued to treat him in
this saving manner for a space of fifty days, until his wound was healed. And the abbot
said unto him, “O my son Simon, depart whithersoever thou wishest.” And he went forth
from them, and departed, and came unto a dry pit, and he dwelt therein with serpents and
scorpions. And the abbot saw a vision by night wherein it seemed that one said unto him,
“Why dost thou send away My servant Simon? Seek him, and bring him back, for it shall
be better for him than for thee in the Day of Judgment”; and the voice rebuked him very
severely because of the going forth of Abba Simon from the monastery. And when the
morning had come, the abbot told all the brethren what he had seen, and how the voice had
rebuked him because of Saint Simon; and the brethren were frightened, and were
exceedingly sorry. And the abbot said unto them, “Depart ye and search for him in every
place, and come not back to me until ye have found him.” And they departed and searched
for him in many places, but they found him not. And after this they went to that pit, and
they lighted a lamp, and they saw him seated with the serpents and scorpions, without food
and without drink; and they let down a rope to him, and they drew him up out of the pit,
and they bowed low before him and said unto him, “Forgive us our sin.” And Saint Abba
Simon said unto them, “Forgive ye me for having caused you all sorrow, for I have
transgressed the command of my teacher the abbot.” And from the time when he took up
his abode in the pit until they took him out he had neither eaten bread nor drunken water;
and they took him to the monastery, and he lived there a life of stern self-denial, and he
fought many spiritual fights. And when they had set him in the monastery, he craved not
for the glory of this fleeting world, and he left the brethren and fled from them, and
departed secretly, and came to a certain rock, and stood up before it for sixty days without
sleeping. And after this the angel of the Lord came unto him, and comforted him, and
made him to know that Gad had called him for the salvation of many souls. And then he
stood for fifteen years upon a pillar, the height whereof was thirty cubits, and he performed
signs and many wonders, and great healings; and he used to teach all those who came unto
him. And his father sought him but found him not, and he died before he could see him.
And after many years his mother heard the report of him, and she came to him whilst he
was standing on the pillar, and she wept greatly; and then she used to sleep under the pillar
of the saint. And the saint asked God to deal graciously with her, and she died whilst she
was sleeping, and they buried her under the pillar of the saint. And Satan became envious
of the saint; and smote him a severe blow in one foot, and it became diseased, but he stood
upon the other foot for many years, until the diseased foot rotted, and worms dropped on
the ground from it. And the captain of a gang of thieves came to him and repented under
his direction, and he lived a few days [there] and died. And the saint asked our Lord Jesus
Christ, and a spring of water sprang up at the foot of the pillar, for the use of those people
who used to come to him to drink water for their troubles. And after this he departed to
another high pillar and he stood upon it for thirty years. And when he had completed eight
and forty years, during which time he lived the ascetic life and fought the spiritual fight, he
682

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
departed to the God Whom he loved, having converted many infidels and pagans, and
brought them into the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he taught many men, and
arrayed them in the garb of the monastic life, and they became like angels of God; and he
died in peace and inherited the kingdom of heaven. And when the Archbishop of Antioch
heard that Saint Abba Simon was dead, he came, bringing with him priests, and deacons,
and officers, and they took away the body of Saint Simon with great honor, and brought it
to the city of Alexandria, with spiritual songs and psalms. And they laid it in a church
there, and many signs, and wonders, and great healings took place through it. Salutation to
Simon of the Pillar.
And on this day also died Saint Sophia. This saint was a kinswoman of a race of kings,
and she had riches and possessions, and she crossed the Sea of Rome with her three
daughters to received the seal of Christ. And the Emperor Andrianus, knowing that she
was a Christian, had her and her daughters brought before him, and questioned her about
her country and her name; and she said unto him, “The name which comes first with me is
that of ‘Christian’; as for what my kinsfolk call me, it is ‘Sophia,’ and I am of a noble
family of Italy. And the Lord Jesus Christ hath in His mercy brought me into thy city, that
I may offer myself and my daughters as an offering.” And she encouraged her daughters,
and bade them not to fear the tortures. And after this her three daughters finished their
testimony, and she wrapped them in shrouds and buried them outside the city. And she
went out to celebrate the commemoration of her three daughters with many other women
of the city, and when she arrived at their graves, she bowed down and prayed, saying, “O
my perfect daughters who are crowned with crowns incorruptible, may I too receive a
crown with you!” And having said thee words she died in peace, and was buried with her
daughters. Salutation to Sophia.
Salutation to the translation of the body of Mercurius, the fighter, which was taken to a
new grave on the backs of three oxen.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 04
(August 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died King Hezekiah, son of Ahaz, of the seed of David, of the tribe of Judah.
After David, the prophet, there was never appointed any king over the children of Israel
like unto this saint, for all the kings of Israel worshipped idols, and built altars to them,
with the exception of this king. When he reigned he broke the idols, and laid waste their
altars, and broke in pieces the serpent of brass because the children of Israel worshipped it;
and because he had done the things which were good God rewarded him by adding greatly
to his days. In the fourteenth year of his kingdom Sanakrem (Sennacherib), the King of
Fars (Persia), came and besieged Jerusalem. Now Sanakrem (Sennacherib) was a very
great and most powerful king, and there was no king as strong and mighty in his days, and
all the [other] kings were afraid, and were subject unto him. And Hezekiah was afraid of
him, and sent to him much money and tribute; but Sanakrem (Sennacherib) was not
683

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
pleased with him, and would receive nothing whatsoever from him. And Sanakrem
(Sennacherib) sent an angry message to Hezekiah, and he uttered many threats against him,
and promised that he would destroy him, and blot out his city. And he reviled God, the
Glorious and Most High, with his foul tongue, saying, “God is not able to deliver thee out
of my hand”; and then he sent to Hezekiah two letters, wherein were written wrathful
blasphemies. And Hezekiah wept, and rent his garments, and he put on hair sackcloth, and
sent into the house of God and prayed before Him, saying, “Thou O God knowest what
Sanakrem (Sennacherib) the king and his messengers are saying, this king worshipeth the
gods of the land which are of wood and stone, but Thou, O God, alone art the Lord God,
the Sustainer of the Universe.” And then Hezekiah sent a letter to Isaiah the prophet, and
made him to know what Sanakrem (Sennacherib) the King of Fars (Persia), was saying;
and he asked him to pray for him. And Isaiah answered him with the word of God, saying,
“Be of good courage and fear not, for God is about to do unto Sanakrem (Sennacherib) an
awful thing, the like whereof hath never been heard of in all the earth.” And that night
Michael, the angel of God, came down from heaven, and slew in the camp of Sanakrem
(Sennacherib) one hundred and fourscore and five thousand men in a moment. And when
[the Persians] woke up and found that their hosts were slain, those who were left of the
slaughter fled to the country of Fars (Persia), together with the king. And Sanakrem
(Sennacherib) came into [the temple of] his gods to pray, and his sons rose up against him
and slew him, and Hezekiah escaped from his hand and praised God. And when the time
drew nigh for Hezekiah to die, Isaiah the prophet came unto him, and found him lying sick
of a most serious sickness, and he said unto him, “Give commands to thy sons, for behold,
thou shalt die.” And Hezekiah prayed before God, and God sent Isaiah unto him a second
time, and made known to him that God had added to his days another fifteen years; and
when he required from Isaiah a sign, he made the sun to go back for him on the sun-dial.
And all the kings of the earth were afraid of Hezekiah, and they brought tribute unto him,
because they knew that God was with him; and he continued in his kingdom nine and
twenty years, and all the days of his life were four and fifty years, and he pleased God [and
died] in peace. And the prayer of the saint, which he uttered through the Holy Spirit when
he was healed of his sickness, is written in the Psalms of David. Salutation to Hezekiah.
And on this day also the saints David and his brethren, and Philip, became martyrs in the
city of Sengera, in the north of Egypt. Salutation to David and his brethren who became
martyrs in the land of Sengar.
And on this day also died Abba Matthew, the anchorite. This saint dwelt in the desert, and
wore hair sackcloth, like a sheep, and he taught Marmehnam to believe on Christ, and he
cleansed Sara of her leprosy. Salutation to Matthew.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

684

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 05
(August 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Abba Abraham, the second. The parents of this saint were exceedingly
rich, and they brought him up in the admonition and fear of God. And when he was grown
up, they brought in a wife for him against his will, and on the seventh day, when he was
sitting on his couch, the grace of God moved him, and he went forth from his marriagechamber, the light guiding him, and he found an empty house, and he took up his abode
therein. And he built up the door thereof, leaving only a small opening through which his
food might be handed in to him. Ten years after he had left the world his father and his
mother died, leaving him many possessions, which he distributed among the poor and
needy. And he lived a life of fasting and prayer, and he possessed nothing except a head
cloth, a tunic, a sackcloth coat, a bowl for water, and a coarse carpet for his bed; and in
such circumstances he fought the fight for fifty years. The men in a certain city, from little
to great, were pagans, and there was no man who was able to convert them to the True
Faith. One day when the bishop remembered the faith and the wisdom of Abba Abraham,
he urged him to become a priest, and to make the pagans believe; and with difficulty he
appointed him a priest, and sent him thither. And having come into their city, he built a
church, and made prayer therein, and he entreated God to convert them to the knowledge
of Himself. And one day he came into the house of their idols, and cast them down from
their seats. And when the men of the city saw this, they were filled with wrath, and beat
him, and cast him out of the city, but when the night came they found him in the church
praying. And they also bound him with a rope, and dragged him outside the city, and they
cast stones at him, and left him well-nigh dead, and went away. And having risen up, by
the might of God, they found him praying for their conversion; and being bound with ropes
and dragged about by them he lived for three years. And when God saw his patience He
turned their hearts to believe on Him, and they were baptized in the Name of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, from the least of them to the greatest; and they became
strong in the Faith of Christ. And when Abba Abraham saw the strength of their Faith, he
was afraid lest they should bring upon him the pleasure of idleness, and he prayed to God,
and made the sign of the Cross over the city. And he went forth, not knowing where to go,
and he departed to another city. And Satan, the hater of good, set himself in opposition to
him and frightened him with many infernal devices, but the saint conquered him by the
power of his prayer. And he continued to fight many strenuous fights, and practiced severe
abstinence, and not a day passed without his shedding tears; he never laughed with his
teeth, he never smiled with his lips, he never anointed his face, he never washed his face
and feet with water; and he thought each day that he might die that day. And when his
brother, according to the flesh, died, he left a daughter, seven years old, whose name was
Marta, and her kinsfolk took her to Abba Abraham, and she was brought up under his
direction. And he taught her the fear of God, and how to pray, and to fast, and to weep,
and she was under his authority until she was twenty years of age. And then Satan envied
him, and he made her to be on such intimate terms with a certain monk that at length he
destroyed her virginity; and she changed her apparel, and her nun’s garb, and departed to
another city. And that night the saint saw in a vision a huge serpent swallowing a dove,
and there remained a little vomit under his feet. And on the following day when Mary
(sic) was missing from her place, Abraham was frightened, and he prayed to God, with
685

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
tears, that He would enable him to find her. And after a few days he heard where she was,
and he changed his apparel, and wrapped his face in cloth, so that [none] might know him,
and he mounted a horse, and arrayed himself and departed to that city; and when he arrived
there, he went to the place where she was. And when he saw her dressed like a serving
woman in a tavern, he was very sorry that she had left her seclusion, but he did no know
how he could have prevented her flight. And then he gave the master of the house one
dinar, which he had brought with him, so that he might prepare for him food and drink
wherewith to make merry with Mary (sic), and he pretended to her that he wished to
commit sin with her. And after supper he had her brought inside the house, and he took
her hand and looked her in the face, and when she recognized him she became like a dead
body. And he said unto her, “Fear not, O my daughter, for thy sin lieth upon me. There is
no man without sin, except God. Come, return to thy old life and habit”; and she said unto
him, “I will.” And on the following day he took her with him, and he set her on a horse,
which he led by the bridle, and he marched along rejoicing, because he had snatched his
daughter (sic) out of the hand of Satan. And when he had come to his house, he shut her
up in a chamber, and she repented in sackcloth and seclusion, and she submitted so
completely to his authority that all those who heard about her marveled. And God made
manifest through her signs and wonders in connection with the casting out of devils and
the healing of the sick. And when Abba Abraham had watched her repentance for ten
years, he died at the age of seventy winters, praising God. And Mary (sic) lived fine years
longer, and devoted herself more and more to the ascetic life, and to weeping by day and
by night, and then she died; and those who saw her ascribed glory to God because of the
great light which was on her face. Salutation to Abraham.
And on this day also died Saint John, the fighter of the spiritual fight, the soldier. This
saint had Christian parents. He was a soldier in the army of Julian, and with him were
other soldiers, and [Julian] commanded them to afflict the Christian people wheresoever
they went. And he was the soldier at the head of his companions, and pretended outwardly
to them that he hated the Christians, and wished to make war upon them, but in secret he
fought on their behalf, and did good unto them, and gave them whatsoever they wanted.
And he used to fast and pray continually, and give alms. And he lived a life like unto the
lives of the saints, and he pleased God, and died in peace, and many miracles were seen at
his grave. Salutation to John, the soldier.
And on this day also died Abba Philip of Debre Bizen. Salutation to Philip.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 06
(August 12)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Justa (Iyalota) became a martyr. This spiritual fighter came from the
country of Caesarea in Cappadocia, and she inherited from her parents many possessions;
but a certain oppressor robbed her and took away all her money, and possessions, and
slaves, and handmaidens by bribery. And when that robber knew that the saint wished to
686

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
inform against him, and expose his sins, and his lying words, he informed the governor of
Caesarea that she was a Christian. And she said within herself, “The possessions of this
world are fleeting things; are they anything at all? And behold, they have robbed me, and
taken them away by force; but if I gain possession of the habitation which is in heaven, no
one will be able to take it from me.” And when she came to the governor and stood up
before him, she confessed boldly, saying, “I am a Christian, I believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Living God, and Creator of the heavens and the earth and of all that
in them is.” And the governor was wroth, and he commanded the soldiers, and they cast
her into the fire, and she delivered up her soul into the hand of God. And the fire neither
touched her, nor harmed her in the least degree, and they took her body out of the fire as if
it had come forth from water. And instead of her money and possessions, she received an
everlasting and never ending kingdom; and Saint Basil praised her greatly. Salutation to
Justa.
And on this day also died the holy father and spiritual fighter Abba Wisa, the disciple of
Abba Sinoda, and he lived under his authority for many years. And Saint Abba Sinoda
revealed unto him many of the mysteries, which he had heard from our Lord Jesus Christ;
and Abba Wisa wrote the history of the fight of Abba Sinoda, according to what he saw
and what he heard from him. And having finished his good course, and pleased God, he
died in peace. Salutation to Abba Wisa.
And on this day also died Saint Mary Magdalene. This saint followed our Lord Jesus
Christ, and He cast seven devils out of her, and she ministered unto our Lord and followed
Him, and she also followed the Apostles; and she was present at the time of the Passion,
and the Crucifixion, and Death and Burial of our Lord. And on the following day, at early
dawn, she saw the stone rolled away, and the angel sitting upon it, and she and Mary, the
mother of our Lord, being afraid, the angel said unto them, “Be not afraid, behold I know
that ye are seeking Jesus, Who was crucified. Behold He hath risen, He is not here.” And
our Lord also appeared unto this Mary and said unto her, “Go ye and tell My brethren, that
I have ascended to My Father, and your Father, and My God and your God.” And this
saint came and told the Apostles about the Resurrection of our Lord and Redeemer, and
she told them how she had seen our Lord, and she told them how He had spoken to her;
and she boasted over them how she had seen our Lord and told them how He had spoken
unto her. And after the Ascension of our Lord, she continued to minister unto the
Apostles, and the grace of the Holy Spirit Paraclete descended upon her together with
them, even as Joel saith in his prophecy, “Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,
and I will pour out my Spirit upon My menservants and maidservants” (Joel ii, 28). And
she preached with the Apostles, and she converted many free women, and many slave
women, to the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the Apostles made her a deaconess
because of her teaching of women, and she baptized them; and great tribulation came upon
her, and opprobrium, and scourging, and much disgrace through the Jews. And she
continued to minister to the Apostles until she died. Salutation to Mary Magdalene.
Salutation to Tekle Michael, the singer of hymns and psalms from his youth up. Salutation
to the dedication of thy house and to the translation of thy body; neither the teeth nor the
claws of wild beasts, or lions, or leopards could harm thee.
Salutation to Tekle Iyesus.
Salutation to Julia.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
687

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 07
(August 13)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day God sent the great angel Gabriel, and he spoke unto Joachim the righteous
man, saying, “Behold, thy wife Hannah shall conceive, and she shall bear thee a daughter,
and in her shall be joy and salvation for all the world”; which actually took place through
Mary, the bearer of God in the flesh. This righteous man Joachim, and his wife Hannah,
were very old in days, and they had produced no child, for Hannah was barren, and they
were exceedingly sorrowful because of this, for the children of Israel used to thrust aside
him that had not begotten a son, and would say unto him, “O thou who lackest the blessing
of God.” Because of this the hearts of this righteous man and his wife were sad, and they
fasted, and prayed, and entreated God frequently by day and by night [for a child]; and
they had reached old age and had become old. And they begged and entreated God
frequently, and they vowed a vow to Him that if they got a child they would make him a
ministrant in the Temple of God. And Joachim was in the sanctuary praying frequently
and making supplication, and behold, slumber descended upon him and he slept, and
Gabriel, the angel of God, appeared unto him, and told him that Hannah his wife would
certainly conceive, and bear a daughter wherein he would rejoice, and because of whom
his eyes would sparkle; and likewise all the world would rejoice, and be glad and would be
saved through her. And when he woke from his dream he came to his house, and told his
wife the vision which he had seen during sleep; and she conceived forthwith, and brought
forth our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, the God-bearer, the object of boasting of all the
world. Salutation to thy spiritual conception, O Mary.
Salutation to Aaron, the brother of Moses.
And on this day also is celebrated the festival of the honorable Apostle Peter, the head of
the Apostles, for in it he confessed among the Disciples, saying, “Christ is the Son of
God.” And when our Lord had brought them outside the city of Caesarea of Philippi, even
as the Holy Gospel saith, He asked them what men said about Him. He knew all the
thoughts and hearts of men, but He took them outside the city by themselves, so that they
might talk out what they were thinking in their hearts about Him. Now the Apostles were
divided among themselves. Some of them said that He was Elias, and some said that He
was one of the early prophets. And Peter was wroth with them, and said unto them, “Nay,
He is Christ, the Son of the Living God.” And when our Lord knew this He brought them
outside the city by themselves, and He asked them, saying, “What do men say about Me?”
And they said what was in their hearts, and some of them said, “One of the prophets.” And
our Lord said unto Peter, “And thou, what dost thou say and confess?” And he said, “The
Apostles have talked when they were by themselves, and they say, ‘Thou art Christ, the
Son of the Living God.’” And because of this our Lord entreated him kindly, and gave
him the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that he might loose and bind; and from that hour
Peter became the head of all the Apostles. And he took the place of our Lord in the city of
Rome, and his position was above that of the chiefs of the world, and of Archbishops, and
Bishops, and Priests, and Deacons, and every other order of the priesthood. Glory be to
our Lord Jesus Christ. Salutation to Peter, the chief of the Apostles and of all the
priesthood of the world.
688

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died the holy father, Abba Timothy, the twenty-sixth Archbishop of
the city of Alexandria. God chose this saint, and appointed him Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria, after the holy father and spiritual fighter Dioscoros died. And great tribulation
came upon him, and they drove him out into exile in the island of Gagra, whither they had
driven Dioscoros the Archbishop, who had lived there before Abba Timothy for six years.
And then the Emperor Leo sent and brought him back from exile with great honor. And
after Marcian had become emperor, he appointed an Archbishop of Alexandria. And after
Marcian died, the men of Alexandria rose up against the archbishop whom Marcian had
appointed, and killed him; and [they] appointed Timothy archbishop according to the
command of Abba Dioscoros. When Leo, the son of Marcian, became emperor he
appointed Archbishop of the city of Alexandria one who was called Timothy, and ‘Abbas,
the Archbishop, he exiled to the island of Gagra, the place where he exiled Dioscoros; and
he lived there for ten years, till Leo died and Zeno reigned. And Timothy the wicked one
fled from Alexandria, and Abba Timothy returned to the city by the emperor’s command
with great honor. And he taught the people continually, and rebuked them, and
encouraged those who believed in the True Faith. He lived in peace and quietness all the
days of his office, and he sat upon the throne of Mark the evangelist for two and twenty
years; and he pleased God and died in peace. Salutation to Timothy.
And on this day was born Joseph, the son of Rachel.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 08
(August 14)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day nine saints became martyrs, that is to say, Lazarus an aged man, and his wife
Salome, which is being interpreted “Weeper,” and their seven children, whose names are
‘An’imo, Antonitus, and ‘Ozya, and Lazarus, and ‘Astibam and Semuna, and Marcolus.
And this elder Lazarus was one of the teachers of the Law of Moses in his days, and his
father was one of the Seventy-two translators who translated the Book of the Law and the
Prophets for Ptolemy, King of Egypt. And this just man taught his children the Law of
Moses. And when Antiochus, King of Rome, reigned over the country of Asia, and the
land of Judah, he besieged Jerusalem, and reigned over it, and he afflicted the people of
Judah, and he punished them with many punishments. And he compelled them to break
the Law of Moses and to eat what was forbidden to eat by the Law of Moses, that is to say
the flesh of swine and such like; and there were many who broke the Law of Moses, and
who set themselves under his authority. But these saints kept the Law of Moses, which
had been given to them by God, and Antiochus tortured them severely, and he beat them,
and sawed their bodies with an iron saw, and cut off their limbs; and the righteous woman
Salome, their mother, encouraged them and made them to endure until they had finished
their martyrdom. And after all of them [were dead], she cast herself into the fire of her
own free will, and did not wait for them to throw her into it; and they received crowns of
martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And it is right that thou shouldst know, O thou
who readest this, that our fathers and doctors of the Church have commanded us to
689

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
celebrate a festival in honor of the saints of the Old Dispensation, in their divers degrees,
and to pay far more honor to them than to the fathers of the New Dispensation, because
they did far more than the later fathers. Salutation to the God of the martyrs Lazarus and
his wife.
And on this day also Ammon became a martyr.
And on this day also died the ascetic and father Abba John, Abbot of Debre Libanos, and
he was the sixth from our father Takla Haymanot. Because of his great righteousness, and
his strenuous spiritual fight, [the monks] chose him and set him upon the throne of Abba
Takla Haymanot; and it is said of him that our Lady Mary, in the form of a dove, used to
appear to him and wave her wing over him. And after pleasing God with his abundant
labors, he died on the eighth day of Nahasse and departed to everlasting joy.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 09
(August 15)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Abba ‘Ori became a martyr. This saint was priest of Satanuf, and he was
of an exceedingly merciful and compassionate disposition, and was pure in mind and in
body, and he saw divine visions frequently. And our Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto him
upon the altar, and revealed unto him the hidden things, which he wished [to know about].
And the report of Abba ‘Ori reached the ears of the governor of the city of Nakyus, and he
had the saint brought before him, and said unto him, “Offer incense to the gods and idols”;
and the saint refused to do so, and he was unafraid of the governor; and although the
governor was wroth with him he did not fear his wrath. And the governor tortured him
severely, and after that sent him to the city of Alexandria, where the governor also tortured
him severely, and cast him into prison. And he used to work signs and perform many
wonderful things, and he healed the sick; and the report of him was noised abroad, and
many men came unto him from all the cities. And when the governor heard this he
commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and they cut off the head of the
saint with the sword, and he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the
heavens. And Saint Julius came and took his body, and wrapped it in cloths, and sent it to
the city of Satanuf, and after the end of the days of persecution they built a beautiful
church for him, and laid his body therein, and great signs and miracles took place through
it. And his body resteth there at the present time and it performeth great healings for all
the sick folk who come unto him in faith. Salutation to ‘Ori.
And on this day also is commemorated Pilate, the Archbishop.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

690

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 10
(August 16)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Matra became a martyr in the days of Demetrius, Archbishop of the city
of Alexandria, and in the days of the Emperor Decius, who denied Christ. When this saint
had read the Edict which order [all men] to deny Christ, and to worship idols, he went and
stole the arm of the idol Apollo, which was of gold, and he broke it into little pieces, and
gave them to the poor and needy; and when they (the priests) searched for the idol’s arm,
and could not find it, they seized many men because of the theft. And at that time this
saint came to the governor and confessed before him, saying, “I am he who stole the arm
of the unclean idol, and I gave it to the poor”; and when the governor heard this he
punished him with great severity, and tortured him. And then he cast him into a red-hot
oven, but God delivered him there from, and brought him out sound and uninjured. And
then they cut off his hands and his feet, and they roasted his body with fire, and they
hanged him upon a tree, head downwards, until much blood ran down from his mouth
upon the ground. And at that moment the angel of God came down from heaven, and
released Saint Matra from hanging, and touched his body with his hand, and healed his
wounds. And a certain man who was blind came and took some of the blood which was
flowing from the nose and mouth of Saint Matra, and he smeared his eyes therewith, and
he saw forthwith. And when the governor was tired of punishing him, he commanded the
soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and they cut off his head and he received the
crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens; and his body became a means of great
healings for the sick. Salutation to Matra.
And on this day also Saint Christopher became a martyr in the days of Maximianus, the
wicked emperor. And when the emperor had him set before him, he said unto him, “Offer
sacrifice to the gods,” and Christopher said unto him, “I worship my Lord Jesus Christ and
to Him I offer up sacrifice.” And Maximianus was wroth with him, and commanded the
soldiers to beat him with rods until his flesh dropped on the ground, and then they cast him
into prison. And then he sent unto him two women to lead him astray with their beauty,
but the saint taught them the Faith of Christ and made them believers. And when they
came back Maximianus said unto them, “What did ye do?” And they said unto him, “We
believe in Christ, the God of Saint Christopher.” And when the governor heard this he
commanded the soldiers to hang one of them on a tree and to burn her with fire, and to tie a
stone to the neck of the other and to hang her, head downwards; and thus they finished
their martyrdom. And then he called Christopher, and they gathered together old, dry
wood, and set it on fire, and they cast the saint into the flames, his hands and his feet being
bound, but the fire did not touch him. And when the people saw this, they all believed, and
ten thousand men were slain. And they also brought plates of iron made red-hot, and they
made the saint to stand upon them, but it injured him not. And when the men of Rome saw
[this] they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ, and twenty-thousand and two hundred of
them, and forty children, believed and became martyrs. And when Maximianus saw that
all the people believed, he was wroth with Christopher and commanded the soldiers to cut
off his head with the sword. And having gone forth from the emperor’s presence, the saint
made a prayer, and sealed his face with the sign of the Cross, and then the soldiers cut off
his head with the sword and he finished his martyrdom. Salutation to Christopher.
691

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also Saint Bikabos and John became martyrs. Bikabos was from the city
of ‘Esmutenakha, and he was a soldier; he was a Christian in secret, and one told
Antiochus the governor about him and about the Bishop Abba ‘Aklog, and about Abba
Nakharew, who was from the city of Tarsa, and about Abba Philip. And when one
informed the governor that they were Christians, he had them brought before him, and he
said unto them, “Are ye Christians?” And they confessed our Lord before him and said,
boldly, “Indeed we are Christians, and we believe on our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ,
the Son of the Living God.” And the governor said unto them, “Put away this thing from
you, and offer sacrifice to the gods.” And the saints answered and said unto him, “We will
not sacrifice to unclean idols, which are to be rejected, we will only sacrifice to our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Creator of the heavens and the earth.” And when the governor heard this
he was exceedingly angry, and he tortured them very severely. And he tortured Saint
Bikabos severely, and often, and he bound him in iron fetters, and threw him on the wheel,
and hanged him, head downwards, and cut off his limbs; and God strengthened him to
endure, and He raised him up whole and uninjured. And after this the governor sent the
saint, with many other martyrs, to the city of Baramun in a ship, and for sixteen days he
neither ate bread nor drank water. And when they came to the city of Baramun the soldiers
tortured the saint very severely, and then they hacked his body in pieces, and he finished
his martyrdom, and received his crown in the kingdom of heaven. And a certain rich
official of the city of Baramun took the body of the saint and wrapped it up in costly
cloths, and sent it to the city of ‘Esmunatekha. And in the days of his torturing an
innumerable multitude of people became martyrs, and through his finishing his martyrdom
five and ninety souls became martyrs. And they built a beautiful church for Saint Bikabos,
and they laid his body therein, and many signs and wonders took place through it.
Salutation to Abba Bikabos.
Salutation to the ancient Lawgivers and to the Evangelists who followed after them.
Salutation to the three thousand, two hundred, and twenty men and two women, who
suffered martyrdom through Christopher.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 11
(August 17)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day three hundred people became martyrs with Basilides the martyr, general of the
city of Antioch.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Mysis (Modosis), Bishop of the city of
‘Awsim. This father was holy and chaste, and a virgin from his youth up, and learned all
the doctrine of the Church, and was made a deacon; and then he went up to the desert of
Hebayeb of Scete, and became a monk under the direction of a righteous man, and he lived
with him and ministered unto him for eighteen years; and he devoted himself to the ascetic
life, and fought the fight in the narrow way in respect of eating, and drinking, and sleeping,
and he fasted, and prayed, and kept vigil constantly in his great humility and love. When
692

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the report of him, and his virtues, and his righteousness became noised abroad, God chose
him to be Bishop of the city of ‘Awsim, after Saint Abba Gamel. When this father had
been made bishop he fought a good fight, and he performed far more strenuous ascetic
labors then he had performed as a monk. And he protected the Christian flock from the
wolves of the Devil, and he watched unto prayer on their behalf, and he never made any
money of this fleeting [world] all the days of his life. When Abba Michael was appointed
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, he became a martyr, without the shedding of blood.
And this father was with those who were in prison, and great tribulation came upon him,
and they beat him with many cruel stripes, and they shut him up in prison, with irons on
his legs, for a long time. And God performed by the hands of this father many signs and
wonders, and because of his miracles, those who knew nothing of his righteousness and
virtues learned about him. And the gift of prophecy was bestowed upon him, and he
declared many things before they came to pass; and they did happen, even as he
prophesied. He prophesied to Abba Theodore, Bishop of the city of Mesr (Cairo), that the
king would not come back in his splendor, and his prophecy was fulfilled; and he
prophesied as to what would happen to the governor of Egypt, and his prophecy was
fulfilled. And he healed many sick and suffering persons by his prayer. And having
finished his fight at a good old age, and pleased God, he fell sick of a slight fever, and he
knew that the time of his death [had come]. And he called the people, and blessed them,
and absolved them, and asked them to pray to him, and they all wept and entreated him to
pray for them. And he prayed over them and said unto them, “Take good heed to
yourselves and be strong in the True Faith”; and when he had said this he died. And they
wept over him with a great weeping, and they wrapped him [in costly cloths] and buried
him with great honor and with the singing of psalms and hymns in the manner which
befitteth bishops; and many miracles and great cures took place through him. And all the
days of his life were twenty years and more. Salutation to Mysis, Bishop of ‘Awsim.
And on this day also Saint Ptolemy, of the city of Upper Manuf, became a martyr. And
one informed the governor that this saint was a Christian, and he had him brought before
him, and Ptolemy confessed our Lord Jesus Christ; and the governor tortured him severely,
and cut off his head with a sword, and the saint received the crown of martyrdom in the
kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Ptolemy.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 12
(August 18)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of the glorious Archangel Michael, for on this day he
appeared unto the righteous Constantine above the city of Rome, and gave him power over
all his enemies, and the emperor conquered them, and his kingdom became strong. And he
destroyed the houses of idols, and built churches, and decorated them with every kind of
decoration. For this reason our Fathers, the doctors of the Church, have commanded us to
celebrate the festival of the glorious angel, Michael the archangel, on the twenty-second (?)
693

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
day of this month. Salutation to thee, O Michael, angel of the covenant and counsel of
God.
And on this day also the righteous Emperor Constantine began to reign over the city of
Rome, and over all the kingdoms of the countries, and the country of Syria, and Jerusalem,
and the country of Egypt, and the Christian kingdoms. He reigned with his father Konesta
in the city of Baranteya (Byzantium) and all the borders thereof for twelve years, and his
father died, and he reigned in Baranteya (Byzantium) and the districts thereof. And he
blotted out oppressors and the workers of iniquity in his kingdom, and his righteousness
and justice were famous in all the ends of the world. And the chiefs of the city of Rome
sent to him asking him to deliver them from the oppression of the Emperor Maximianus,
who denied Christ, and to save them from his slavery. When Constantine read their letter
he was very sorry, because the oppression of that infidel had come upon them, and he
pondered in what way he could deliver them. And the honorable Cross appeared unto him,
and he was helped thereby. He departed to fight against Maximianus, and he crushed him
and conquered him, and Maximianus fled from him; and the bridge which was over the
river split asunder and he died an evil death, and his soldiers were drowned in the river.
Now this took place in the seventh year of his reign. And straightway the elders of the city
of Rome, and all the men thereof, received Constantine with great honor, and with joy and
gladness, and he made a festival to celebrate his victory for seven days. And all the
learned men of the city of Rome, and the poets (?) thereof, whose words were sweet and
who were skilful in declaiming them, pronounced encomiums on the Honorable Cross, and
called it the “Savior of their city”; and they pronounced encomiums on Constantine, and
called him, “Conqueror,” and “Conqueror by the might of the Cross.” And in the eleventh
year of his reign Constantine was baptized with Christian baptism by the hand of Sal Peter
(sic), Archbishop of the city of Rome. And his name was mentioned at the altar, as at this
day, and how the Honorable Cross appeared unto him, and how he waged war on
Maximianus, and how that infidel was drowned. And behold we have written the
description of all this in the section for the eighteenth day of the month of Megabit, the day
of the death of this righteous king. Salutation to the day when Constantine began to reign
in Rome.
And on this day twenty hundred men became martyrs with Basilides.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 13
(August 19)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of our Lord Jesus Christ, and how His appearance was
changed on Mount Tabor, when there were with Him three of His disciples, that is to say,
Peter, and James, and John. And our Lord said concerning them, “There stand here those
who shall not taste death until they see the Son of God and of man coming in His glory.”
This is the glory wherein the Apostles saw Him. His apparel was white as snow, and His
countenance was changed and became like lightning, emitting light. And behold Moses
694

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
and Elias came to Him, and they talked with Him that all men might know that He was the
God of Moses, whom He had raised from the dead, and the God of Elias, whom He had
brought down from heaven (sic). And because of this Peter said unto our Lord, “Dost
Thou wish, O Lord, that we should make here three tabernacles, one for Thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias?” In these words, which Peter spoke, there is a sign of lowliness
and humility. He saw our Lord, and thought that He would live on the mountain . . . and
he wished to make for Him a place where He could hide from the sun. Peter did not wish
for himself, and for his fellow-apostles, as he wished for our Lord, and for Moses, and for
Elias; but he made himself and his fellow-apostles like slaves of those lords. And marvel
not at the little knowledge of the apostles, for they were not perfect in knowledge at that
time. And when Peter said this, a cloud overshadowed them, so as to make it clear to Peter
that He did not want a habitation made by the hand of man. And a voice came forth from
the cloud which confirmed the belief in the Godhead of our Lord in the minds of the
apostles, saying, “This is My Son, Whom I love, in Whom I am well pleased; hear ye
Him.” And Moses and Elias talked with Him, and they confessed His grace and His
goodness, for by the coming of our Lord and by His going up upon the mountain [the
truth] of the prophecy of the prophets was made known of a certainty. And the apostles
and the prophets rejoiced, for they saw His Incarnation which they had known not of, and
the apostles rejoiced also when they heard the voice of the Father, which they had never
before heard. They heard it at that time, and by the voice of the Father they became certain
of the Incarnation of our God the Son, which was hidden from them; and when they heard
the voice of the Father the glory of the kingdom appeared, and the apostles knew that it
was our Lord Jesus Christ Who had raised up the soul of Moses, and that it was He Who
had brought up Elias, for verily none save God Who buried him knew where the grave of
Moses was, and none save He Who had brought him up to heaven knew where Elias was.
And none was able to make the dead to live save Almighty God, Who hath dominion over
the heavens and the earth. And Mount Tabor is a similitude of the Church, and our Lord
gathered together therein the Two Laws, the New and the Old. And when the disciples
heard the voice of the Father, they fell down and became like dead men; and Moses
returned to his grave, and Elias went up to heaven. And our Lord Jesus Christ stood alone,
for the voice came because of Him, and the prophets were frightened and the apostles fell
down upon their faces, for the Father revealed the Name of His son, and that He existed for
ever with His Father. Because of that voice the Apostles preached that He was God
indeed, and also that the flesh (or, body), which He had put on, was of the race of the
children of man. And in the Gospel our Redeemer preached saying . . .. If He was not
flesh, why did the angel Gabriel say unto Mary, “God be with thee!” And if He was not
flesh, Whom did they lay in the manger? And if He was not God, Whom did the angels
praise when He went down from heaven on the day of His birth, saying, “Glory to God in
the heights, and peace on earth, His goodwill to man.” If He was not flesh, Whom did
John baptize in the Jordan? And if He was not God, Who was it that raised up Lazarus
from his grave? It was Christ, the Only Son, the Word of God. We confess that He is
perfect God and perfect man, One Person without separation. And when the apostles fell
down upon the earth, and became like dead men, our Lord touched them with His Lifegiving hand, and He said unto them, “Rise up, and fear not.” And they rose up
straightway, and they lifted up their eyes and saw no one except our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who was alone. Salutation to Debre Tabor, which is called Debre Telul.
And on this day also was the martyrdom of Saint Safrira, the daughter of Moses the
prophet.
695

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also died Abba Galyon, the spiritual fighter. This saint was a spiritual
fighter, and he ceased from prayer neither by day nor by night. He used to eat one meal
only during the whole week, and from the time, when, as a young man, he became a monk
until he became an old man, he never went outside the court of the monastery; and none of
the brethren ever saw him except at prayers. And when Satan saw his spiritual fight, he
took the forms of monks and they came to him at the time of midnight, and said unto him,
“We are dwellers in the desert and recluses; one of us having died, we want to take thee
with us, and we have come to thee.” And Abba Galyon thought that their words were true,
and he went with them until they brought him to the top of a desert mountain, where there
was no food; and when he saw that they were making a mock of him, he made the sign of
the Cross over his face, and they disappeared from him. And having turned to this side and
to that, he lost the road whereon he should go, and he prayed a long prayer, and then there
appeared unto him some holy monks from the monastery of Abba Sinoda, who were going
about from one monastery to another singing the Psalms of David, and they asked him
questions about his actions. And when he told them his story they took him with them, and
he dwelt a full year with them, and ate fish dried in the sun. And Abba Isaac, his teacher,
who had made him a monk, lacking news of him, asked God to be allowed to see his face
[again]; and Abba Galyon knew this by the spirit, and went to him. And when Abba Isaac
saw him, he rejoiced and said unto him, “Where hast thou been?” And Abba Galyon told
him everything, from the beginning to the end. And then at the time of his death the
brethren came, and wrapped him in cloths and buried him. Salutation to Abba Galyon.
Salutation to Benjamin, who by reason of his spiritual excellence was caught up in the
body [to heaven].
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 14
(August 20)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Simon Shalusi and John his friend. These saints were in the kingdom of
Yostos (Justus), the believing emperor, and their parents were rich and honorable; they
wished to keep the festival of the Cross, and they departed to Jerusalem to worship at the
holy places. And when they had finished celebrating the festival, as they were riding back
to their own city on their horses, they drew nigh to Jericho, and John saw on the plain of
the Jordan certain monasteries wherein monks dwelt. And he said unto Simon, “O my
brother, these are the monasteries wherein live the angels of God.” And Simon said unto
him, “Can we see them?” And John said unto him, “If we were with them (i.e. the monks)
we could see them.” Then they got down from their horses, which they handed over to
their servants, and they told them to go on slowly in front until they overtook them; now
they pretended to them that they wanted to fulfill the law of the body. And when they had
drawn nigh to the road of the Jordan they both said, “Come, let us make a prayer. Let one
of us stand on the road to our city, and let one of us stand on the road which will bring [us]
to the monastery of the monks; and let us cast lots, and where it pleaseth God [for us to
go], let us go.” And then Simon stood up on the road to the Jordan, and John stood up on
696

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the road whereon their men had departed; and when they had cast lots, the lot went forth
for the road of Simon. And they embraced each other and kissed, and they went along the
road to the Jordan rejoicing. And one admonished the other to be vigilant in the doing of
good works, and each feared that his companion would not attain to his end. John feared
for Simon, that he would not attain to his end, [because of his] love for his parents, and
Simon feared for John, because of love for his parents, and because he had married in those
days a beautiful and rich wife. And then they prayed and said, “O Lord our God, if we
find a monastery, the doors of which are open, let this be a sign unto us that it is the
monastery wherein we are to become monks.” And there was a certain archimandrite, who
was called Nikon, and he used to work many miracles, and the gift of prophecy had been
given to him. That night he saw, as it were a man, who said unto him, “Open the doors of
the monastery in order that sheep may come in.” And when Simon and John came to him,
he said unto them, “Welcome to you, O ye sheep of Christ”; and then he received them to
himself as men who had been sent by God. And they asked the archimandrite to give them
the tonsure, and to array them in the garb of the monk, for they had seen a monk, with a
crown of light on his head, surrounded by angels, and therefore they longed to become
monks quickly. And on the following day when the archimandrite put the holy garb upon
them, their faces were shining with the grace of the Holy Spirit, and even in the night they
could see each other’s faces as they did by day; and they saw crowns of light upon their
heads, like unto those they saw upon the head[s] of the monks. And then there came to
them the spiritual thought that they should be separated from among the monks, and should
go forth into the desert. That night a shining man appeared to the archimandrite, and said
unto him, “Open the gates that the sheep of Christ may go forth.” And when he woke up
he went down straightway, and found the doors of the monastery open, and whilst [he
stood] sad and sorrowing, behold the servants of Christ came, wishing to go forth. And he
saw in front of them figures of eunuchs carrying lamps, and some of them were carrying
staves of kings, and when he saw them he rejoiced greatly, and he joined them and they
told him what was in their hearts, and they asked him to pray for them. And then he wept
for a long time, and he turned his face towards the East, and he set Simon on his right hand
and John on his left. Then stretching out his hands to heaven, he made a prayer, and
committed them to the care of God, and he entreated Him to protect them from all evil; and
he sent them away in peace. Then they departed by the road to the Dead Sea, and they
came to a river which was called ‘Arnon. And the found a cave wherein an old desert
monk used to live, now he had recently died, and in it there was what they needed, that is
to say, a store of grain and food from which the elder had eaten; and they rejoiced in God
exceedingly Who had prepared this for them. And they lived there, and fought the spiritual
fight for many days, and they lived apart from each other, the distance between them being
a stone’s throw. And Satan set himself in opposition to them, and he fought against them,
and Saint Nikyos, their father, used to come to them in a vision, and pray on their behalf,
and teach them psalms whilst they were asleep; and when they woke up they would recite
everything which he had taught them during sleep, and they rejoiced exceedingly. And
heavenly visions were granted unto them, and the power to perform miracles. And they
dwelt in that desert nineteen years, and endured the cold of the night and the heat of the
day, until they had vanquished Satan by the might of Christ, And then Simon said unto his
brother John, “What doth it profit us to live by ourselves in the desert? Come let us go into
the desert, that we may be profitable to others and deliver them.” And John said unto him,
“O my brother, this thought appeareth to me to be due to the envy of Satan.” And Simon
said unto him, “God hath commanded me to become the mockery of the world; come, let
697

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
us pray a prayer.” And then they prayed, and they embraced each other, and they wept
until they spoiled their apparel. And Simon went to Jerusalem, and he continued to pray
for three days to God that He would keep hidden his work until he died. And then he went
into the city, and pretended to be mad, and sometimes he healed those who were mad, and
sometimes he carried fire in his hands. And he found by the gate a dead dog, and he
dragged it about by his girdle like people who amuse themselves, and at last the people
reviled him and cried out, “The mad monk”; and they used to run after him and buffet
him. One day, now it was the First Day of the week, he took a branch (?) of a nut-tree, and
went into the church at the time of the Offering, and he broke the lamps, and beat the
women until he drove them out of the church. And sometimes he seized women as if he
were going to lie with them, and [he kept them fast] until their husbands beat them. And
when the time of his death had drawn nigh God commanded His angel to tell him the day
of his death, and of the death of John his brother. And he went in under a vine, and he and
John his brother delivered up their souls into the hand of God. Salutation to Simon and
John.
And on this day God worked a great miracle in the city of Alexandria, (by reason of which
many Jews believed,) by the hand of Saint Abba Theophilus, Archbishop of the city of
Alexandria, brother of Saint Cyril. Now the miracle was this: There was in the city of
‘Esmadreya a very rich Jew whose name was Falskinos, who feared God and performed
the Law of Moses, according to his ability. And there were in the city of Alexandria two
men who were Christians, and they were poor and earned their living with their hands.
And Satan brought into the heart of one of them a blasphemous thought, and he said unto
his companion, “O my brother, why do we serve Christ and [remain] poor, whilst this
Falaksinos who is a Jew, is exceedingly rich?” And his companion answered and said unto
him, “O my brother, know that the possessions of this world are nothing before God. For
if He had power over them, He would not give them to the worshippers of idols, and to
whoremongers, and to thieves, and to murderers. The prophets were poor men and lived in
tribulation, and also the Apostles, and our Lord saith, ‘The poor are My brethren.’” And
Satan, the hater of good things, would not permit that man to receive any of these words,
but he stirred him up, and he went to that Jew Falaksinos, and he asked him and said unto
him, “Let me be thy servant.” And the Jew answered and said unto him, “It is not
convenient to me for thee to serve me. I only want a servant who believeth my Faith, and
who is my own man. If thou dost want alms, I will give thee money, and [then] depart.”
And that wretched man answered and said unto him, “Take me into thy house, and I will
do whatsoever thou commandest me.” And the Jew Falaksinos answered and said unto
him, “Wait until I take counsel with my teacher.” And the Jew departed and he told his
teacher how the man was a Christian. And his teacher said unto him, “If he hath denied
Christ his Messiah, take him and circumcise him.” And the Jew returned, and told the
Christian what his teacher had said to him, and the wretched man accepted this condition,
and the Jew took him a carried him to their synagogue. And the chief of the Jews
questioned that wretched Christian before all the Jews, and he said unto him, “Is it true that
thou wishest to deny thy Messiah, and become a Jew?” And the Christian said unto him,
“Yea”; and that debased and contemptible man denied our Lord Jesus Christ, our God,
before the Jews. Thus to poverty in money he added poverty in Faith. And the chief of the
Jews commanded them to make for him a cross of wood, and they made one for him as the
chief of the Jews commanded, and they gave him a reed, on the top of which was a sponge
full of vinegar, and a spear. And he said unto the Christian, “Spit upon this cross.” And he
offered to him the vinegar and said, “Pierce [the cross] with this spear, [saying,] ‘I have
698

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
pierced Thee, O Christ.’” And that debased man took the cross and the spear from them
and did as he commanded him. And when he pierced the honorable cross with his cursed
hand, much blood and water flowed forth, and ran down on the ground, and it continued to
flow for a long time. And straightway that apostate fell down and died, and dried up like a
stone. And great fear fell upon all those Jews, and they cried out, saying, “One is the Lord
God of the Christians, and we believe on Him.” And then the chief of the Jews took some
of that blood, and made a sign therewith over the eyes of a girl who was blind, and she saw
straightway. And that Jew and all the men of his house believed, and very many of the
[other] Jews believed. And then one went and told Abba Theophilus, the Archbishop,
what had happened, and he rose up, and took with him Abba Cyril, and many of the
priests, and many of the people, and went to the synagogue of the Jews. And the
archbishop saw the cross with blood and water running down from it, and the saint blessed
himself, and made the sign of the Cross with the blood on his forehead, and on the
foreheads of all the people. And he commanded, and they took up that cross with great
honor and brought it with the singing of hymns to the church, and laid it therein; and they
gathered up the blood from the ground and laid it in a vessel for “blessing,” and it healed
the sick. And after this Falaksinos and all the men of his house, and many other Jews,
followed the archbishop, and they confessed before him our Lord Jesus Christ, Whom their
fathers in times of old had crucified, and then he baptized them with Christian baptism in
the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And he associated them with
him in prayer, and he administered to them the Holy Mysteries, and they departed to their
houses rejoicing, and praising, and thanking God. Salutation to the conversion of the Jews.
And on this day also died Damiates, the martyr, who worked a miracles at the time when
he, together with his servants, were stoned to death. Salutation to the great miracle of
making a blind man to see, and raising up to life a dead man on his bier.
And on this day also Saint Basilicus became a martyr. To this saint our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared when he was in prison, and He said unto him, “Depart, say farewell to thy
kinsfolk, behold the time of thy martyrdom hath come.” [The text is corrupt here.] And he
passed the night in saying farewell to his mother and to his kinsfolk. And on the following
day they brought Saint Basilicus, and tied him to two pillars, and beat him, and they made
for him pegs of brass, and they fastened them to his feet like shoes so tightly that they
pierced his feet, and the blood ran out on the ground; and all those who saw him wept for
him. And then they tied him to a dry tree, and men struggled with each other to touch the
hem of his garment, when they saw the miracles, which he performed on many sick folk.
And then they took him to the city of Terlinos in a ship, and the soldiers said unto him,
“Eat, that thou mayest not die.” And the blessed Basilicus said unto them, “I am filled
with heavenly food, and I do not choose [to eat] the food which perisheth.” And on the
following day they brought him to the governor, who said unto him, “Sacrifice to the
gods.” And Basilicus said unto him, “I offer offerings of praise to the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Spirit.” And then the governor commanded the soldiers to bring him into the
house of his idols, and the saint stood up and prayed to God and at length fire came down
from heaven, and burnt up the idols. And the governor being afraid took to flight, and went
outside the city, and he was wroth and commanded the soldiers to hang him [on a tree]. And the
saint prayed, and gave thanks to God, and they cut off his head, and we saw his soul with many
angels who were taking it up [to heaven], and our Lord Jesus Christ called to him and said unto
him, “Come, ascend, Basilicus, for I am not a liar, and I fulfill all that I say.” And thus he finished
his martyrdom. Salutation to Basilicus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

699

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 15
(August 21)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Christina, the daughter of Rubanos, became a martyr. Her parents
worshipped idols, and she herself offered incense to them according as her father had
taught her. And one day the fear of God entered her heart, and she turned herself towards
the East, and she asked Him to teach her the path of the kingdom of heaven; and the Holy
Spirit taught her the Faith of the Trinity. And when her father came he said unto her,
“What hath happened unto thee, O my daughter?” And she said, “I am going to live the
life of Christ.” And her father was dismayed, and he said unto her, “What hath changed
thy heart?” And she said unto him, “I am instructed by the God of heaven”; and then her
father departed, being very sad and sorrowful. And Saint Christina rose up, and prayed to
God, and straightway the angel of God came unto her, and he said unto her, “Be strong, for
thou shalt be tortured by three governors.” And then the angel of God sealed her with the
seal of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he gave her the Holy Mysteries. And [she]
went into the house of the idols, and broke the idols in pieces, and when her father saw her
he commanded them to beat his daughter, until there went forth from her body honey
instead of blood. And they also laid her upon an iron bed, and they lighted a fire under
her, but the fire did not harm her and it consumed ten thousand pagans [who were there].
And then her father commanded his servants to cast her adrift on the sea on a raft. When
she had prayed, our Lord Jesus Christ came with His angels, and baptized her, and Michael
gave her, on a trident of fire, the Body and Blood of Christ, and cleansed her from the
uncleanness of idols. And that night Rubanos her father died. And another governor,
whose name was Dios, came, and he commanded the soldiers to bring Saint Christina, and
to hang her on a tree, and to beat her, and to light a fire under her; and when the women
saw her stripped naked they cursed the governor, and he cut off their heads with a sword.
And Christina they cast into the prison house. And when the people saw her three
thousand of them believed, and the wicked Dios died. And there came a third governor,
whose name was Julius, and he seized Saint Christina, and forced her to sacrifice to the
gods, and when she cursed him he cast her into a vessel filled with boiling pitch, and lead,
and wax, but this did not harm her. And he also commanded the soldiers to cast her to the
serpents, but they licked the dust at her feet, and bit the keeper of the serpents, who died.
And they also slit open and cut her breasts, and cut out her tongue, and she took the piece
of her tongue, which was cut off, and cast it into the eyes of the governor, and blinded
him. And he was filled with wrath, and commanded the soldiers to cast her to the serpents;
and one bit her in her heart, and one in her side, and thus she died by the Will of God; and
innumerable miracles and wonders were made manifest at her grave. Salutation to
Christina, whom God baptized. Salutation to the three thousand companions of Christina
who were martyred.
Salutation to God Who helped the Apostles to be present at the burial of the Virgin.
And on this day also died Saint Marina. This saint was the daughter of a man, who was
very rich indeed, and he was a Christian; and the name of her mother was Mary. And
Marina’s mother died when she was a little girl, and her father brought her up with good
teaching until she became a woman, and then he wanted to give her in marriage, and to go
himself and become a monk in one of the monasteries of the desert of Scete. And she said
700

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
unto her father, “Why wouldst thou save thine own soul, and destroy mine?” And he
answered and said unto her, “What shall I do with thee, seeing that thou art a woman?”
And she said unto him, “O my father, I will take off my woman’s dress, and will put on the
garb of a man”; and she rose up straightway, and shaved off the hair of her head and put on
the garb of a man. And when her father saw the strength of her will, and the earnestness
wherewith she fought to carry out her will, he gave all his possessions to the poor and
needy, keeping only a very little for himself, and he changed his daughter’s name from
Marina to ‘Anba Marina; and then he took her with him and carried her to the desert of
Scete. And he went into a certain monastery, and dwelt in a cave with his daughter for ten
years, fighting the spiritual fight, and then her father, who was an old man, died; and Saint
‘Anba Marina was left by herself, and she doubled her fasting, and prayers, and vigil. And
the abbot sent the saint, together with three monks, to the city on certain business of the
monastery, and he did not know that she was a woman, but by reason of the low sound of
her voice, which was due to her manifold ascetic labors, he thought that she was a young
man. And having departed with the monks, she and they lodged in a guesthouse. And that
same night there came one of the king’s soldiers and lodged in that guest house, and he
saw the daughter of the master of the house, and he destroyed her virginity, and he said
unto her, “When thy father shall say unto thee, ‘What hath happened unto thee?’ do thou
say unto him, ‘It is the young monk ‘Anba Marina who hath destroyed my virginity.’”
And when she had conceived, and her father knew that she had done so, he asked her
saying, “What hath happened unto thee, O my daughter? Who hath destroyed thy
virginity?” And she answered and said unto him, “It is Anba Marina who hath destroyed
my virginity.” And her father rose up, and went to the monastery and began to curse the
monks. And when the abbot heard him he asked him, saying, “Who dost thou curse the
monks, and dost not fear God?” And the man told him what had happened to his daughter,
and he said unto him, “Anba Marina the monk is he who hath destroyed the virginity of my
daughter.” And when the abbot heard this, he asked him questions, and the man answered
believing that what he said was true. And the abbot asked the master of the guesthouse,
and said unto him, “Hide this matter, and do not bring disgrace upon the monks in the eyes
of the laity.” And then the abbot summoned ‘Anba Marina the monk, and rebuked him,
and cursed him, and Saint ‘Anba Marina did not know why the abbot cursed her. And
when she knew what had happened, she wept and bowed down at the feet of the abbot, and
she besought him, saying, “I am young, I have sinned, forgive me my sin”; and the abbot
was furious with her, and cast her out from the monastery. And she sat outside the door of
the monastery until the daughter of the master of the guest house had brought forth her
child; and the parents of the girl took the child, and brought it to ‘Anba Marina and set it
down by her. And she took the child and went over to some shepherds, who were
pasturing cattle and sheep, and she begged from them, and they gave her milk, and she
made the child drink it. And she increased her fasting, and prayers, and spiritual fight, and
she lived outside the gate of the monastery for three years. Then the monks gathered
together, and asked the abbot to have mercy upon ‘Anba Marina, and to bring her into the
monastery; and he brought her in, and having laid heavy penalties upon her, she mingled
with the monks. And the saint used to perform very hard labors, and she boiled the lentils,
and cleaned the cells, and took up the dust and ashes and carried them away and cast them
outside the monastery, and fetched water; and she gave the boy to drink. And he grew up
and became a monk. And when four (?) days were fulfilled for Saint ‘Anba Marina in that
monastery, she was sick for three days, and then died in peace. And when the abbot knew
that ‘Anba Marina was dead, he commanded the monks to blow a trumpet before they
701

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
buried her. And when they removed her clothing, and found that she was a woman, all the
monks cried out, saying, “God have mercy upon us”; and they marveled exceedingly and
glorified God, and informed the abbot what had happened. And the abbot came and
looked upon her and marveled, and he wept because of what he had done to her. And then
he sent and had the master of the guest house brought, and told him that ‘Anba Marina was
a woman, and he took him in, and the master of the guest house saw and wondered; then
the abbot prayed over her and they wrapped her up, weeping, and singing psalms and
hymns; and when they had prayed for her blessing they buried her. Behold now, see what
happened. God commanded a certain Satan, and he took the daughter of the master of the
guesthouse, and the young man who had destroyed her virginity, and he tormented them
until he brought them to her grave, where they confessed their sin before all the people.
And innumerable miracles and wonders were made manifest at her grave. Salutation to
Marina.
And on this day also Saint Laurentius became a martyr in the days of Decius Caesar. This
saint was a man in whom great confidence was placed, and he was appointed an
archdeacon, and he had charge of the revenues of the archbishop. And when the emperor
had killed the archbishop because of his Christian Faith, he commanded his soldiers to
bring Saint Laurentius before him, and when they had brought him, they took him into the
prison house. And the saint found there, a blind man, and he said unto him, “Wilt thou
believe in the Son of the Living God? And wilt thou be baptized in His Name, so that
thine eyes may be opened?” And the blind man said unto him, “Yes, my lord.” Then the
saint prayed over some water in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
and washed his eyes therewith, and his eyes were opened, and he cried out with a loud
voice, saying, “Blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ Who hath given light to mine eyes,
through the prayer of His servant Laurentius.” And when the emperor heard this, he
commanded his soldiers to bring Saint Laurentius before him, and he urged him to bow
down to the idols; and when he refused to do so they broke his teeth with a stone, and tore
off his garments, and laid him upon an iron bed, and kept a fire burning under him until his
body melted. And the saint continued to pray to his God until he delivered up his soul into
the hand of God, and the angels came to meet it, saying, “Hallelujah,” and they brought it
into the heavenly Jerusalem. Salutation to Laurentius.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 16
(August 22)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the Ascension of the body of our Lady Mary, the God-bearer, into
heaven. After her death the Apostles continued to be sad and sorrowful, because of her
separation from them, and because they were left orphans by her; for our Lord had given
them the hope that they would see her in the flesh. Whilst John the evangelist was
preaching in the country of Asia, on the sixteenth day of the month of Nahasse, he was
caught up in the spirit to the Garden of Delight, and he saw our Lord Jesus Christ sitting by
the Tree of Life, where was the body of our Lady Mary, and He commanded His Seven
702

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Angels to summon her from earth. And they said unto her, “God, our Lord Jesus Christ,
commandeth that the body of His pure mother shall go forth.” And straightway the body
of our Lady Mary went forth from the grave at the foot of the Tree of Life, and our Lord
Jesus Christ comforted her, and He said unto her, “Come to Me, O My beloved mother,
that thou mayest ascend to the kingdom of heaven, to the joy which is everlasting.” And
straightway all the trees of the Garden bowed their heads, and the angels and archangels
took her up, and the righteous bowed low to her. And David, the prophet, sang a hymn of
praise, saying, “And the Queen shall stand at Thy right hand, and her apparel shall be of
fine needlework with gold woven through it” (Psalm xlv, 9). And she sat down at the right
hand of the Son of God, with great glory, and she went up into the heavens sitting upon the
chariot of the Cherubim. And John the evangelist was blessed by her, and he bowed low
before her, and he turned and came down from heaven, and found the Apostles gathered
together and sorrowing for the body of our holy Lady, Mary the Virgin. And John told
them what he had seen, and how they had taken the body of our Lady Mary up into
heaven, with great joy, and praise, and songs, and hymns. And when the Apostles heard
this they were exceedingly sad and sorrowful because they had neither heard nor seen what
John had heard and seen. And whilst the Apostles were sorrowing behold our Lord Jesus
Christ appeared unto them, and said unto them, “Peace be unto you, O My children! Why
are ye sad about the body of My mother Mary? Behold, I shall show her to you, and your
hearts shall rejoice”; and having said these words He went up into heaven with great
glory. And the Apostles continued [to wait] there for a full year. And on the first day of
Nahasse John said unto the Apostles, “Come, let us fast for two weeks and let us entreat
God, and make supplication unto Him, that He will consider us worthy and will show unto
us the body of our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, sitting on the right hand of her beloved
Son, that we may rejoice in her.” And they fasted as John had said unto them, and it came
to pass that when the sixteenth day of Nahasse had come, as it were to-day, our Lord Jesus
Christ caught all the Apostles up to heaven, and they saw in her flesh our holy Lady, the
Virgin Mary, sitting on the right hand of her beloved Son and God in great glory. And she
stretched out her hands, and blessed each one of the Apostles, and the souls of the
Disciples rejoiced exceedingly. And our Lord Jesus Christ served as priest in His holy
Body, and Stephen the archdeacon ministered with Him, and John with Him, saying,
“Stand up in fear”; and all the Apostles stood up around the altar. And there was great joy
at that time, the like whereof before never was. And when our Lord had finished, He gave
them the Holy Mysteries. And then [Mary] went up before them sitting upon the chariot of
the Cherubim. And our Lord Jesus Christ said unto our Lady Mary, “Tell thy children, the
Apostles, to preach in all the world the commemoration of thy Ascension into heaven,” as
it were on this day. “Whosoever shall celebrate thy commemoration, I will destroy his
sins, and he shall never see the fire at all, for mercy shall find every soul who shall take
heed and shall receive the Holy Mysteries on this day, which is the day of thy Ascension
into heaven.” And our Lady Mary said unto Him, “Behold, my sons, behold, they have
seen with their eyes, and they have heard with their ears, and they have received with their
hands, and they shall see other wonders greater than these”; and as the Virgin was saying
these words she gave the salutation of “Peace” to the Apostles, and they returned to the
Mount of Olives. And it is meet for us, O beloved brethren, to celebrate the
commemoration of the Ascension of our Lady Mary into heaven with joy and gladness, so
that she may make intercession for us, at all times, with her beloved Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ. Salutation to the Ascension of Mary into heaven, and to Mary as the tree of
knowledge, and to her body.
703

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also took place the translation of the body of Saint George, the chief of the
martyrs, from the country of Persia to the church of Lydda, with great splendor. The
translation of his body took place at the same time as the translation of the body of our
Lady Mary, and therefore those who know how to love her, paint his picture with her
picture, so that it may be a port of salvation for those who pray in his name. Salutation to
George.
And on this day also Gegar, governor of Syria, [became a martyr]; and this was the reason
for his martyrdom. When our Lord was with His mother Mary in the mountains of
Libanos, and Gegar heard that Herod wanted to seize them and kill them, he sent horsemen
to them to bring them away from the mountains. And because of this Herod seized him,
and tortured him with every kind of torture, and he cut off all his limbs. And then our Lord
Jesus Christ appeared unto him, and gave him a promise concerning everyone who should
call upon his name, and celebrate his commemoration, and write the history of his strife.
And then the soldiers cut off the head of Gegar, and he was crowned with three crowns.
Salutation to Gegar, the governor of the martyrs.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 17
(August 23)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day ‘Entawos (Entaeus), the ‘Amorawi, became a martyr. Originally this saint was
a wicked man, and knew not Christ, and he devoted all his toil and thought to heap up
money. And having arrived in the city of Damascus, he went into the church of Saint
Theodore, the man from the East, whilst the congregation was assembled there, now it was
the day of their festival, and having entered the church, he set fire to the furniture thereof,
and broke the cross. And when he went up into the upper part of the church, he saw with
his own eyes fire coming down from heaven in the form of arrows, which transfixed all his
soldiers, and one of the arrows pierced his right eye, and he suffered great agony, and the
sweat dropped from him. And he cried out from the depth of his heart, and, shedding tears,
said, “I believe in Thee, Jesus Christ, Son of the Living God, the God of Saint Theodore,
and in the Holy Trinity”; and he pledged himself never again to worship any other [god].
Now the Christians, who were celebrating the Offering, did not know what had happened,
and when they heard they marveled, and their Faith was increased. And when Saint
‘Entawos (Entaeus) had gone to the bishop, whose name was Elias, he told him everything
that had happened, and he asked him to baptize him with Christian baptism. And when the
bishop prayed over the water in the vessel for baptism, a pillar of light, like unto the
rainbow came down, and all the people saw it. And Saint ‘Entawos (Entaeus) and those
who were with him, both Jews and pagans, sixteen hundred and ninety-eight in number,
were baptized, and received the Body and Blood of Christ. And Saint ‘Entawos (Entaeus)
said, as he marveled at this, “I saw in a dream a shining Lady, and she took me by the hand
and led me to the altar, and she brought me near with her hand. And then I went to
Jerusalem and I received the Body of Christ. And again I saw on the altar a White Lamb,
and having been slain with the knife (?) of the cross, its blood ran into the cup. And when
704

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
I had partaken of the Body of Christ, the Body became pure bread, and His Blood became
wine.” And then, when he was departing from Damascus, the people thereof seized him,
and took him to the king. And when the king knew that he was strong in the Faith of
Christ, he commanded his soldiers to beat his mouth with clubs (?) until his teeth were
broken, and his blood filled his mouth. And then they tied him up in strips of hide for
several days, without water and food, and they took him out from them and cast him into a
furnace, which was heated with pitch, and sulfur, and bitumen, and fat, and there came
forth there from a sweet and pleasant odor. And when the soldiers looked at him they
found him standing up in the middle of the fire praying, and they took him to the king.
And the king said unto him, “Where didst thou learn the power of magic?” And the saint
said unto him, “I know nothing of magic, but [I know] that the might of my Lord Jesus
Christ hath put thee to shame.” And being filled with wrath, the king commanded the
soldiers to cut off his head with the sword. And when Saint ‘Entawos (Entaeus) stood up
facing the East, he stretched out his hands, and committed his soul to God; and as he was
praying, a voice came from heaven saying, “Come, My servant, in peace, so that thou
mayest rest with George and Stephen.” And when he had finished his prayer the soldiers
cut off his head with the sword, and having finished his martyrdom innumerable signs and
wonders were made manifest through his body. Salutation to ‘Entawos (Entaeus).
And on this day also ‘Akrates, the brother of Antaeus, became a martyr. Salutation to
‘Akrates.
And on this day also Saint James, who was from a small city the name of which is Manug,
on the borders of Abus, in Lower Egypt, became a martyr. The parents of this saint were
Christians, and fearers of God, and they had begotten three daughters before they begot
him. And when they were grown up a little, they committed them to a nunnery to be
taught, and brought up, in the fear of God, and they learned many of the Books of the
Church and of the Old and New Testaments. And when their parents wished to bring them
back from the nunnery, the maidens did not wish to return, but they dedicated themselves
as the brides of Christ; and their parents sorrowed because of their separation from them,
but God consoled them by means of this Saint James, and they rejoiced in him when he
was born to them. And when his days were six years, they sent him to the city of ‘Awesu,
to school, and he studied learning of every kind, and was perfect in every branch of
knowledge; and his father deputed him to take charge of his money and possessions, and
his herds and flocks. And there lived with his father a certain old shepherd of sheep, and
he used to perform many works of excellence, and he used to go down into a well of water
during the days of winter and stand up therein the whole night praying; and Saint James
used to do even as did the old shepherd of sheep, and he continued to do so for many days.
And Satan having brought tribulation upon the Christians, many of them became martyrs.
And the old man handed over the sheep to the father of Saint James, and when Saint James
departed to become a martyr, the father of Saint James asked the shepherd to go with him.
And he left [him] with that old man, and [told him] to return. And when he had gone with
him, he found that the governor was in Upper Egypt, passing judgment upon Justus, the
king’s son, who had forsaken his kingdom and become a martyr. And the old man said
unto James, “Observe, O my son, if this king of Egypt hath rejected a kingdom of this
world, and followed Christ, and hath separated himself from his wife and family, how very
much should we, who are poor folk, be consoled. O my son, be not sorrowful because of
thy separation from thy parents.” And then the old man approached the governor, and
confessed the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ before him, and cursed his gods. And the
705

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
governor condemned the old man, and cut off his head with the sword speedily, and he
became a martyr. And he tortured Saint James very severely, and he beat him with whips
made of cords, and then he made [an iron] red-hot and laid it on his belly. And Saint
James lifted up his eyes to Christ, and prayed, saying, “O my Lord Jesus, help me under
this tribulation”; and the Lord delivered him from the torture and raised him up whole and
uninjured. And then the governor put him in a sack, and cast him into the river, and the
angel of the Lord raised him up from the river whole and uninjured. And the saint stood
up before the governor, and cursed him and his unclean gods; and the governor was wroth
with him and sent him to the governor of Farma, who tortured him very severely. They cut
out his tongue, and tore out his eyes and his eyelids, and they tortured him on the wheel,
and they made slits in every part of his body, and at length all his limbs were crushed, and
his blood flowed down on the ground like water; and Suriel, the angel of God, came down
and delivered him, and health his wounds. And when the governor was tired of torturing
him, he commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, [and they did so,] and
he received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And when he was in
the city of Farma there were two other men who became martyrs with him, that is to say,
Abraham and John, who were of the men of the city of Gamnudi. Salutation to James,
who was learned from his youth. Salutation to the aged shepherd who followed the Law of
God.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 18
(August 24)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the holy father, Abba Alexander, Archbishop of the city of Alexandria.
This holy father was an honorable man, and much tribulation came upon him through the
people of Arius. And in his day Abba Athanasius renewed the excommunication of Arius,
and he removed him, and expelled his followers, from the churches of the city of
Alexandria. And Arius departed to the city of Constantinople, and he went unto the
Emperor Constantine, the son of Constantine the Just, and he made accusations against
Athanasius to him. And when he found no rest with him, Arius asked the emperor to
command this Father Alexander to receive him with his priests. And the emperor sent
messengers to this father, and had him brought, and he said unto him, “Athanasius
transgressed our command, and would not received Arius; thou knowest that we appointed
thee, and thou must not transgress our command. Make my heart glad, and release Arius
from thy ban.” And Saint Abba Alexander answered and said unto him, “The Church will
not receive Arius, because he doth not worship the Holy Trinity”; and the emperor said
unto him, “But he confessed his belief in the Holy Trinity before me.” And Alexander
answered and said unto him, “If he believeth in the Holy Trinity and if he believeth that the
Son is equal with the Father in His Godhead, let him write this with his hand.” And the
emperor had Arius brought, and he said unto him, “Write with thy hand the True Faith,”
and he wrote with his hand the True Faith, although he did not believe it in his heart, and
then he took an oath on the Holy Gospels that this was the True Faith, but he swore
falsely. And the emperor said unto this Father Alexander, “There is now no pretext to be
706

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
found against him since he hath written the True Faith with his own hand, and taken an
oath on the Holy Gospels.” And Abba Alexander said unto the emperor, “Athanasius
renewed the proclamation of the excommunication of Arius, which was written by the
hand of thy Father Constantine, and was written also by the hands of the Three Hundred
and Eighteen [Bishops] of the True Faith, and he expelled him and all his people from the
city of Alexandria. But wait, at my request, for one week, and if nothing happeneth to him
during this week, then his profession of the Faith is sincere, and his oath is righteous, and I
will receive him, and will let him mix with the priests, and he shall take part with them in
the service of the Sanctuary.” And the emperor answered and said unto him, “Know thou
that I will not wait at thy request seven days. If thou wilt not receive him I will levy a very
heavy tax upon the churches.” And after this Father Alexander went out from the
emperor’s presence, and departed to his own house, and he fasted there the whole week,
and he besought God to deliver Arius from his sin. And when the week was expired, Arius
arrayed himself in fine apparel, and went into the church, and sat down in front of the altar
with the priests. Then this Father Alexander entered, being sad and sorrowful, and not
knowing what to do. And he stood up and began the service of the Offering. And the
bowels of Arius were moved, and he went to answer the call of nature, and everything,
which was in his body flowed away from beneath him, and he was left empty. And when
Arius delayed in returning, the people searched for him and enquired where he was, and
they found him dead in the latrine; and they told this father what had happened, and he
praised Christ Who had not cast away the Church. And the emperor marveled about this,
and knew that Arius had sworn an oath falsely, and had written a lie with his own hand;
and then the emperor knew the holiness of this father, and his righteousness, and
Orthodoxy, and he knew that Arius was an infidel. And the emperor praised the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and confessed that their Godhead is one. And this father,
having followed a good course, and arrived at a good old age, departed to God, Whom he
loved, and received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to
Abba Alexander.
Salutation to Justinus, who dwelt on the top of a mountain, and learned by heart the
Psalms, and the Books of the Prophets and Apostles.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 19
(August 25)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day took place the translation of the body of Saint Abba Macarius the Great to the
desert of Scete. After his death certain man came from the city of Selawir and stole the
body of the saint, and built a church over it in their city; and it remained there until the
Muslims ruled over the city, and then the men of Selawir removed it to another city. And
they built a church over him in their country, and he remain therein until the days of Abba
Michael the Archbishop, that is to say for a period of four hundred and forty years. When
Abba Michael was appointed, he became steward (or, administrator) of the church of Saint
Abba Macarius. And when the archbishop went up to fast the Great Fast in the monastery
707

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
of Abba Macarius, he cried out, saying, “I wish that our Lord Jesus Christ would help me,
and that I shall find happy days, and that the body of Saint Abba Macarius shall be among
us in this monastery.” And after a few days Abba Michael, the steward of the church, and
certain elder monks with him, departed on some business of the monastery, and a spiritual
thought moved itself in their minds. And they came to the place wherein was the body of
Saint Abba Macarius that they might take him up, and the governor and all the men of the
city gathered together with staves and swords, and prevented them from taking up the body
of the saint; and the elder monks fell asleep being very sad and sorry in their hearts. And
that night Abba Macarius appeared to the governor and said unto him, “Why dost thou
prevent me from departing to my sons? Let me go with them to my own place, and
prevent them not from carrying me away with them.” And when the morning was come,
the governor rose up, and he was in fear and trembling, and he called the elder monks, and
delivered over to them the body of Abba Macarius, and they received him with great joy.
And they placed the body in a ship, and when they arrived in the city of Tarnut, there were
many people with them from every city, who had come to bid the body of Abba Macarius
farewell. And the elder monks lodged there that night, and they prayed, and they
celebrated the Offering, and received the Holy Mysteries, and then they took up Macarius
and carried him to the desert. And as they were going along, they came to a place in the
desert, which was half way, and they wished to rest for a little because of [their] fatigue.
And Abba Michael said unto them, “As God Who holdeth the place of the Cherubim in His
hand liveth, we will not rest until God revealeth unto us and shows unto us, [the place
wherein] Saint Abba Macarius shall rest.” And when the camel which was carrying the
body of Abba Macarius came to that place, he knelt down, and would not rise up again,
and he began to turn his head to this side and to that, and to lick the box wherein was the
body of Saint Macarius. And the elder monks knew that that was the place where the saint
was to rest, and they marveled exceedingly, and glorified God greatly; and that place is
well known to this day. And when they came to the monastery, all the monks went out and
received him with great honor, and with singing and with hymns, and with the Gospel, and
with the Cross; and they had lighted lamps with them. And they carried him on their
heads, and they bore him along singing as they went, until they brought him into the
church, with great honor; and God performed many miracles that day. Salutation to the
translation of the body of Abba Macarius. Salutation to the children of Macarius.
Salutation to Finhanes (Phinehas).
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

708

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 20
(August 26)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Abba Salama the interpreter, and on this day also is commemorated Saint
Hizawi (Hizaku). Salutation to Salama.
Salutation to James, the Pure.
And on this day also died the seven holy young men of the city of Ephesus. And it came to
pass that in the days of the wicked Emperor Decius these seven young men were in his
army, and he appointed them to offices in his government. And when he established the
worship of idols, certain men made accusations against these saints to him, and he seized
them and shut them up in prison. But as he wanted to go to another place he released them
from their bonds and sent them away until he returned, thinking within himself that they
would turn from their good counsel. And when the emperor had gone out of the city, these
saints refused to do the work of the soldiers and would not worship unclean idols, and then
they went to a cave in the mountain, and closed up the mouth thereof and went to sleep
inside it. And they had among them silver moneys on which was stamped the name of the
Emperor Decius. And one after another of them used to go into the city every day in the
early morning, and buy food for them. One day one of them heard a rumor of the coming
of the Emperor Decius; and when the news reached them that the Emperor Decius had
come to the city of Ephesus, they closed the doors of the cave on themselves, and went to
sleep. And a certain believing soldier knew the place where they were, and he used to wait
for them to come into the city, but after the arrival of the emperor they did not come. And
the soldier rose up and departed and came to that cave, and he found that they had shut the
doors of the cave from the inside, and he thought that they were dead. And he took a tablet
of brass, and wrote upon it the story of their strife, and of what had happened to them, and
he laid that tablet in a cavity in the wall of the cave. And sorrow laid hold upon the saints,
and they slept by the commandment of God for three hundred and seventy-two years. And
Decius died, and many other emperors reigned after him, and at length came the days of
the Emperor Theodosius. And it came to pass in the thirty-eighth year of his reign, that
certain men discussed among themselves the words of those who said, “There is no
resurrection of the dead,” and many people followed them. And God wished to reveal the
truth, and to make men to be certain that the resurrection of the dead would assuredly take
place, and He woke up those seven holy young men. And they gave to one of their number
some of the moneys, which they had, and they commanded him to go and buy them food to
eat, and he heard [from] them the story of the wicked Emperor Decius. And when he came
into the city, the manner thereof appeared to him to be changed, and he saw crosses on the
gates of the city and on the walls thereof, and he heard the people taking oaths in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he asked one of them, saying, “Is not this the city of
Ephesus?” And the man answered and said unto him, “Yea.” And he took out the silver
moneys which he had and gave to a certain merchant in the market, in order to buy from
him food to eat; and when the merchant saw the silver money, he did not find it to be the
silver money with which one could buy in those days; for he found the name of Decius, the
wicked emperor, stamped upon it. And the merchant seized him and bound him, and he
said unto him, “Thou art a seeker after ancient treasure, and behold this silver money
which is on thee is a proof of it.” And whilst they were quarrelling together, many men
709

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
gathered round about them, and they asked him, saying, “Whence comest thou?” And he
answered and said unto them, “I belong to this city.” And they said unto him, “Whom dost
thou know among the men of this city?” And he said unto them, “So and so.” And of
those men whom he said he knew, there was not one of them left alive; and they dragged
him away, and were wroth with him. And the story of the young man was heard by the
bishop, Abba Theodore, and by the Emperor Theodosius, who had that man of the seven
brought before him. And the emperor and the bishop asked him, saying, “Tell us what
hath happened unto thee, and from what country thou comest.” And he answered and said
unto them, “We were seven men, and we belonged to the army of the wicked Emperor
Decius. And when he departed to another place we went out of the city of Ephesus, and
came into a cave, and we closed up the mouth of the cave. And we lay down and have
slept there until now. And behold my six companions are lying in the cave.” And the
emperor and the bishop went forth, and all the people with them, and they came to the
cave, and they found the saints lying there, and the written and engraved tablet, in the
cave. And they read the tablet, on which it was said that it had been engraved in the days
of the wicked Decius, that is to say, three hundred and seventy-two years before. And
when the emperor, and the bishop, and all the people saw this, they marveled exceedingly,
and they glorified God greatly; and those who did not believe in the resurrection of the
dead believed forthwith when they saw this miracle. And when the seven young men had
been questioned, and they had made known everything, which had happened to them, they
lay down again, and delivered up their souls into the hand of God. And the emperor made
gold coffins for them, and he wrapped them in silk cloths and laid them in the gold coffins,
and signs and wonders took place through their bodies. Now their names were these:
Maximanus, Tamukigros, Mardimus, John, Constantine, Antonius, and Dionysius.
Salutation to the Seven Brethren.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 21
(August 27)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated a festival commemorating our Lady Mary, the God-bearer, who
became the salvation of the world, and who maketh intercession for us at all times, and for
all those who celebrate her commemoration. Salutation to thee, O Mary.
And on this day also died Saint Irene, which is being interpreted, “Peace.” This saint was
the daughter of King Lucianus, and he built for her a palace, and he placed in the walls
eight windows, and round about it were twelve halls. And he made for her a table of gold,
and vessels of gold and silver, and he commanded a certain elder to teach her; and then he
settled her in the palace, with three handmaidens to render her service, and closed the
doors of the palace upon her. And the elder teacher used to instruct her from outside; and
her days at that time were seven years. And one day whilst she was sitting at table, she
saw a dove with an olive leaf in her mouth, and she laid it upon the table, and then there
came an eagle with a crown, which he laid upon the table, and a raven came with a serpent,
which he laid upon the table; and she was frightened at this sight, and she told her teacher
710

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
about it. And he answered and said unto her, “The dove is the teaching of the Law, and the
olive leaf is Christian baptism; the eagle is the conqueror, and the crown is the works of
the righteous; the raven is a king, and the serpent is tribulation.” And her teacher said unto
her, “Thou must fight the fight for the Name of Christ.” And her father the king came to
visit her, and he said unto her, “O my daughter, I wish to marry thee to one of the great
nobles”; and she asked him, saying, “O my father, wait three days, until I can take counsel
about it with my soul.” And when her father had departed from her, she shaved off her
hair, and stood up before the altar of the idols which were in the palace, and asked them to
advise her about marriage; but they made no response whatsoever to her. And the saint
lifted up her eyes to heaven, and said, “O God of the Christians have mercy upon me
according to Thy good pleasure.” And the angel of God came to her and said unto her,
“Behold, on the morrow there shall come to this city one of the disciples of Paul the
apostle, and he shall baptize thee with Christian baptism”; and on the following day God
sent unto her one of the disciples of the apostle, and he baptized her with Christian
baptism. And after three days her father and her mother came to her, according to their
promise, and she said unto them, “I am a Christian. I believe on my Lord Jesus Christ, the
Son of the Living God; the Creator of heaven and earth.” And her father was wroth with
her, and he had her brought out into the midst of the city, and he commanded his servants
to bind her with cords, and to throw her in the road, and to make horses trample upon her;
and they did to her as he commanded, but no harm came to her. And when her parents saw
this, they believed on our Lord Jesus Christ and marveled exceedingly, and they forsook
their kingdom, and departed to their abode and dwelt there. And when the king, who lived
near their country, heard the story of them, and what had happened to them, he came to
that city, and said unto them, “Return to you kingdom,” but they did not wish to do so;
now that king ruled the whole country. And he tortured Saint Irene, and he set starving
lions and serpents to attack her, but no evil whatsoever happened to her. Then he sawed
her with a saw, and he hung a heavy stone about her neck, but our Lord Jesus delivered
her, and raised her up uninjured from every torture. And her parents called the priest who
had baptized her, and he baptized them with Christian baptism, and three hundred of their
servants, and many of their kinsfolk and people of the city. And then Numerianus the king
heard the report of her, and he sent and had her brought to him, and he took her to the city
of Kalani, where he tortured her severely, and shut her up in a brass bull, but God smashed
the brass bull, and brought her out there from. And Numerianus the king died, and King
Sabor reigned in his stead. And he heard the report of Saint Irene, and he had her brought
to him, and then he speared her with the spear, which was in his hand, and she delivered up
her soul. And our Lord Jesus Christ raised her up from the dead. When Sabor the king
saw this miracle, he marveled exceedingly, and he bowed low before her and believed on
our Lord Jesus Christ, and with him were many people of the inhabitants of the city. Now
the number of those who believed through her was three hundred and ten thousand . .
.women. And the father and mother of Saint Irene died in the palace. And the Divine
power bore the saint to the city of Ephesus, where she performed many signs and
wonders. For her confidence was in our Lord Jesus Christ [when she stood] before the
kings of Persia, and the kings of Macedonia, and the kings of Kalaika and Constantinople.
And then she died in great honor, and they built a beautiful church for her, and laid her
body therein, and many signs and wonders took place through her body, and a great
healing of the sick. Salutation to Irene.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
711

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 22
(August 28)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day [is commemorated] the great prophet Micah, the son of Eyoel Yoak, and his
father also called him “Joram.” This righteous man prophesied in the days of Jehosaphat,
King of Judah, the son of Joram, and of the kings Ahaziah, and Khatolya, and God
proclaimed by his mouth great things. And he prophesied concerning the Incarnation of
our Lord Jesus Christ, saying, “Behold, God shall come from His place, and He shall come
down and walk upon the earth.” And he prophesied concerning the Nativity of our Lord
Jesus Christ, in Bethlehem of Judah, saying, “And thou Bethlehem [in] the land of
Ephratha, shall not be less than the kings of Judah, for from thee shall go forth a king, who
shall rule my people Israel; and his going forth shall be before the creation of the world.”
And he prophesied concerning the destruction of the Temple of the Jews, and concerning
the rising up of another Temple in its place in all the ends of the earth. And he prophesied
concerning the going forth of the Gospel, saying, “The Law shall go forth from Zion, and
the Voice of God from Jerusalem.” And he prophesied to Ahab, the King of Israel, saying,
“Thou shalt die in the battle of Edom, King of Gilead.” And many years having been
fulfilled to this prophet, and having reached a good old age, he departed to God, Whom he
loved. And he prophesied eight hundred years before the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and he was buried in the village the name of which is Merata. Salutation to Micah.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 23
(August 29)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day three (or, thirty) thousand of our Christian brethren in the city of Alexandria
became martyrs. And this took place when the wicked Emperor Marcianus exiled our
father Dioscoros to the island of Gagra; and there was rebellion and great tumult in the city
of Alexandria for many years. And when Marcianus died, and Leo reigned, the people of
Rome set over themselves a man from the city of Alexandria, whose name was Abrutarius,
as archbishop. He had been a priest in the city of Alexandria, and he believed in the
Council of Chalcedon. Only a few of the Alexandrians accepted him, and the rest of the
people received the Holy Mysteries from the priests whom our father Abba Cyril and Abba
Dioscoros had appointed. And when Abrutarius was appointed, he formed a company of
his friends who believed his words, and he excommunicated ‘Awtaki (Eutyches), the
priest, who declared that the Godhead [of Christ] was mingled in His Incarnation. And by
this he wished to seduce the man of the city, and to make them at length to enter into an
evil faith; and they believed his words, because they thought that our father Dioscoros and
his company agreed with ‘Awtaki (Eutyches) in [his] denial. Now our father Dioscoros
excommunicated ‘Awtaki (Eutyches), and he cursed all those who mingled the Godhead of
Christ with His Incarnation. How could one turn and believe his words? Nay, the Faith of
712

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
our father Dioscoros was like the Faith of Saints Basil, and Gregory, and Cyril, who
believed in the One Nature of God, the Word, Which became incarnate, and not that the
Godhead changed and became flesh, and not that the flesh changed and became Godhead,
but that each of them remained by Itself. And it was not right for them to say that Christ
became Two Natures, and Two Persons, and Two Things after His Union, which did not
destroy [His] Unity. And ‘Awtaki (Eutyches) believed in the mingling of Nature. Our
fathers excommunicated those who separate the Natures, after they had become One, and
likewise they excommunicated those who mingle them after they were separated. And on
the day following the Council which Abrutarius had gathered together, they found
Abrutarius killed in his house, and his companions said that it was one of the disciples of
our father Abba Dioscoros who had killed him. And he said unto them, “We are brethren.
Perhaps it is one of the companions of ‘Awtaki (Eutyches) who hath killed him, or perhaps
thieves killed him in order to carry off his money.” And this was true, for the Council did
not assemble on account of us, nor because of us; but we agree in the excommunication of
‘Awtaki (Eutyches). And the companions of Abrutarius sent a letter to the king wherein
they said, “Behold, the people have treated the government with insolence, and have
behaved contemptuously towards the emperor, and have killed the archbishop whom the
emperor appointed.” And whilst they were gathered together because of this thing, behold
our brethren assembled and appointed Abba Timothy archbishop over them. And those
wicked men sent another royal official, one ‘Abrotari, to the emperor, saying, “Behold they
have killed Abrutarius and have appointed over them an archbishop without the emperor’s
command.” And the emperor was exceedingly angry because of these two letters, and
Satan entered into him, and he sent many soldiers, and they slew of our brethren three
thousand Orthodox Christians, small and great, slaves and free men, and he exiled Abba
Timothy to the island of Gagra, where he lived for seven years. And if [they say] that one
of the servants of Abba Dioscoros killed Abrutarius, as Satan taught them, they speak
falsehood. Was it meet that they should kill three thousand men instead of one man,
especially as they did not kill any one of the wicked Arian heretics, who killed bishops and
priests? But let everyone know that this took place through the operation of Satan. And
after this shameful slaughter, the emperor knew that our brethren did not kill Abrutarius,
and that they did not know who did kill him. And the emperor sent and brought back
Timothy from the island, and he paid him great honor, and set him upon the throne of his
office in the city of Alexandria. And he sat in the days of Leo for twenty-two years.
Salutation to those who died by violence.
And on this day also Saint Damianus became a martyr. They tortured this saint in the city
of Antioch with every kind of cruel torture. When the governor was tired of torturing him,
he commanded [the soldiers] to cut off his head, and they cut off his head, and the saint
received the crown of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to Damianus
the martyr, the workman of Jesus.
Salutation to Mary the daughter of Abraham.
Salutation to Abraham, the Friend of God.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

713

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 24
(August 30)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the head of the monks and father of all the world, Abuna Takla
Haimanot. The birthplace of this saint was Zarare, in the country of Showa. His father’s
name was Saga Ze’ab, and his mother’s name was Egzi’E Haraya. His father belonged to
the family of priests who illumined Ethiopia with their Faith; his wife was barren, and they
used to pray to God to give them a son. And whilst they were living thus, Satan made
Matalome governor of Damot, and he laid waste the whole of the districts of Showa, up to
the border of ‘Amhara. And all the nobles, one after the other, gave him their women, and
the beautiful women whom he found during his raid he made his concubines. And in those
days he came to the city of Selalesh and killed all the Christians, and Saga Ze'ab fled in
fear, and fell into a pool of water, which became like a tent. And Egzi’E Haraya the
soldiers seized and carried off, and they brought her to Matalome. And when he saw her
beauty he rejoiced exceedingly, and he adorned her with apparel of fine linen. Then he
returned to his country, and his nobles gathered together in order to make ready for the
feast of his marriage with her; and when Egzi’E Haraya heard this she made prayer to God
that He would deliver her from this unclean union. And straightway Michael the archangel
came and he took her up upon his wings, and brought her into the church at the time of the
third hour, and as Saga Ze'ab was going out of the church he saw her standing dressed in
ornamental apparel. And he said, “Who is this woman?” And when he asked her he knew
that she was his wife; and she told him everything which had happened to her from the
beginning to the end. One night Michael, the angel of God, appeared unto them, and told
them that they should produce a son whose righteousness should be heard of in all the ends
of the earth, and that the heavens and the earth would not be sufficient [to contain] one of
his excellences. And after a few days this saint was conceived, on the twenty-fourth day of
the month of Megabit, and he was born on the twenty-fourth day of the month of Tahsas;
and there was joy in the house of his father and mother. On the day when they gave him
Christian baptism they called him “Zara Yohannes.” On the third day after he was born, he
cried out, saying, “One is the Holy Father, One is the Holy Son, One is the Holy Spirit.”
And he grew in the Holy Spirit, and in wisdom, and he worked signs and wonders, thus:
When anything which was used for food was wanting in his father’s house, he would
touch, with a smile, a little flour, and fill all the house therewith, and he did the same with
olive oil, and honey, and fat, and wine; and he would fill the house so full that everyone
who saw it, and heard of it, marveled. And when he was seven years old his father taught
him the Psalms of David, and all the Books of the Church. And then he took him to the
Bishop, Abba Cyril, who made him a deacon and prophesied concerning him, saying,
“This boy shall become a chosen vessel of God,” and having received the office of deacon
[he departed] to his own country. When he was a young man, he used to traverse the
desert hunting wild beasts, and [one day] at noon, our Lord appeared unto him, sitting
upon the wings of Michael, and said unto him, “O My beloved, henceforward thou shalt
not be a hunter of wild beasts, but thou shalt catch many souls in [thy] net. And thy name
shall be ‘Takla Haimanot,’ for I have chosen thee from thy mother’s womb, and I have
sanctified thee like Jeremiah the prophet, and John the Baptist. And behold, I have given
thee power to heal the sick, and to drive out unclean spirits in all the world”; and having
said these words He disappeared, and the saint returned to his abode. And after a few days
714

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
his father and his mother died, and he gave all his goods to the poor and needy, and he left
all the house open, and took his staff and went forth by night, saying, “What shall it profit
a man if he gain the whole world and destroy his soul?” And then he took the rank of
priest, and began to preach the Faith in all the country of Showa; and he baptized seventy
thousand people in his own country. And he destroyed all the shrines of idols, and cut
down the trees thereof, so that the devils, who used to dwell in them, might take to flight.
And after three years a voice cried unto him from heaven, saying, “O Takla Haimanot, rise
up and go to the land of Damot, that thou mayest receive for me much spoil.” And as he
was journeying along the road of ‘Enarte’at, he met some men, who were magicians and
diviners, and their king, and they were performing acts of divination. During the violent
quarrel which he had with them, they beat him with a thick iron rod, until the bones
showed through his skin, and he died; but God gave him strength to endure, and He raised
him up sound and unharmed. And he remained thus for four mornings, and after he had
prayed the earth swallowed up the magicians and their beasts. Passing on from that place
he arrived at the country of Damot, and he destroyed the diviners. And when Motalame,
the governor, heard of him, he commanded his soldiers to bring him to him, bound with
strong fetters, and he said unto him, “Why dost thou destroy my country?” And having
said this to him, he commanded the soldiers to kill him, and to cast him down a precipice
several times. And God gave him strength to endure, and He raised him up unharmed.
And having performed signs and wonders before the governor and destroyed the
soothsayers, he made the governor to believe on Christ, for he raised up before him many
dead persons. Now those who were baptized with him, on that day, were in number twelve
thousand and ninety-nine souls. And when the wherewithal for the administration of the
Holy Mysteries was lacking Michael brought down to him [some oil of] Meron from
heaven, and he said unto him, “Consecrate the Tabernacle with this, and administer the
Holy Mysteries to the people”; and he did as Michael told him. And our father continued
to teach the king the Books of the Prophets and Apostles. And when he had lived in
Damot for twelve years, a voice cried to him from heaven on Easter Day, and our Lord
gave him the promise that He would give the kingdom of heaven unto all those who called
upon his name and celebrated his commemoration, and that he would deliver them from all
tribulation and sorrow. And the voice also said unto him, “Go thou to the country of
‘Anhare, to Abba Betselote Mikael,” and when he had arrived there he lived with him for
ten years; and he served by day with his disciples, and during the night he made
innumerable bowings to the ground. And he worked the flour mill, and drew water, and
cut wood for the fire ceaselessly. And besides this, he wrought many miracles, raising the
dead, and healing sick folk without number. And then God said unto him, “O My beloved
Takla Haimanot, go thou to the place (or, shrine) of Stephen, the first to martyrs, which is
called Hayk, and there thou shalt find a holy man whose name is Iyesus Moa, and he will
give thee the order of monkhood.” And he rose up and departed, and came to the seacoast, and passed over the sea as if he were on dry land, without wetting his feet. When he
came to the holy man, he welcomed him, and gave him the apparel of the monk, [that is to
say,] the tunic and the head cloth only; and he dwelt there for ten years working signs and
wonders, and each [night] he made seven thousand bowings. And then God said unto him,
“O My beloved Takla Haimanot, go thou to the land of Tegre, and go up the mountain
which is called Damo, and thou shalt find there a holy man whose name is ‘Yohanni,’ and
take thou from him the cap and cloak, and dwell there until I tell thee.” And he dwelt there
fighting the fight, having received the cap and the cloak, for twelve years. And God
appeared unto him and said unto him, “Get thee out of this mountain, and travel about
715

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
through the deserts of Tegre and visit the monasteries and houses of the monks.” And he
went down from that high mountain, being exhausted by the toil thereof, and he traveled
through the deserts of Tegre. And having finished this he went down to Jerusalem,
Michael, the angel, guiding him, and when he came to the Red Sea he passed over it,
according to his wont, without wetting his feet. Having crossed the sea he came to
Jerusalem, and he went round and visited all the holy places. And he returned to the land
of Tegre and talked and mixed with all the saints; and he went down to Jerusalem a second
and a third time, and wished to dwell there. And the Holy Spirit said unto him, “Go back
to the land of Muladek, for that is thy lot.” And going back he visited Abba Yohanni of
Debra Damo. Thence he went down and traveled on towards Bur, and he found
Medhaninne ‘Egzi’E, in a place the name of which is Gwonaguena, and that saint gave him
the garb of the monkhood, and prophesied to him that he should become the father of all
the monks of Tegre, and the son of Abba Samuel of Waldebba, and of all the teachers who
were in Tegre. And when our father Takla Haimanot had gone out from Tegre, he went to
the place of Hayk and gave to Iyesus Moa the cap and the cloak. Thence having gone out
and passed through all the deserts, he came to the land of Showa, and he dwelt in the desert
of Geda for many days. And then he departed to the land of Gerarya, and he made a cell
among the rocks and he went out neither by day nor by night. And his disciples were in
number seventeen, and many came to him, both men and women, and they became monks
and widows, and they lived in one house; but no man had knowledge of any woman,
because Satan was fettered by prayer. And then he built in his cell a kind of wall to lean
against, and he fixed therein sharp points, behind him, on his right hand, and on his left, so
that they could pierce his body. And having stood in the cell too long, the thigh bone of
one of his legs broke, and then he stood up on one foot for seven years. And our Lord
Jesus Christ came unto him, with our Lady Mary, and with the prophets and apostles, and
the righteous, and the martyrs, and Michael and Gabriel, and He said unto him, “O My
beloved, thou dost resemble Me in My suffering, and I will make thee My equal in My
kingdom. And behold, thy weakness in this world is ended, and it hath been accepted by
Me. Come, that henceforth thou mayest inherit everlasting life”; and then He gave him the
promise concerning those who should call upon his name, and celebrate his
commemoration. And then the saint became slightly sick of the plague, and he died at a
good old age, his days being ninety-nine years and eight months. And they wrapped him
in cloths with reverence and praise, and buried him in his rock. Salutation to Takla
Haimanot.
And on this day also died the holy father, the fighter and conqueror, the soldier and apostle
of Christ, Thomas, Bishop of the city of Mar’as, the confessor. The tongues of men are
incapable of describing the glory and righteousness of this saint. Beings of flesh are
incapable of understanding his excellences and virtues. Originally this saint was an
ascetic, and a fighter of the spiritual fight. He fasted and prayed frequently, and kept vigil
by night and by day, and he gave alms in abundance to the poor and needy. And God
chose him and made him Bishop of the city of Mar’as, and he protected his flock like the
Apostles. And when Diocletian the wicked was reigning, one of his governors came to the
city of Mar’as to torture the Christians. And he sent some wicked soldiers to this holy
father, and they seized him and brought him to him, and they beat him, as they dragged
him over the ground, and he arrived in the presence of the governor with his blood
dropping on the ground. And the governor said unto him, “Deny Christ and worship the
gods.” And the saint answered and said unto him, “I will not worship filthy stones, I will
worship only my Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God. Cursed art thou, and thy
716

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
filthy idols, and cursed are those who worship them.” And the governor was wroth with
Saint Thomas, and he tortured him very severely, and he beat him very cruelly, and he
hung him up, and boiled pitch and poured it into his mouth and nostrils, and he tortured
him for many days. Now the hearts of those deniers of Christ were like unto stones, and
they did not want the saint to die quickly, so they prolonged his torture in order to frighten
the multitude, and make them to deny Christ; but they were vanquished, and whilst they
were weary of torturing him, he was strong in rebuking them. And they cast him into a
dark place and forgot him, and he dwelt in that one place for twelve years. And each year
the wicked men came to him, and tortured him, and cut off one of his limbs. And in this
place they cut off his ears, and his nose, and his lips, and his hands, and his feet, and they
pulled out his front teeth and his grinders, and his whole body was as black as ink. And
they forgot him in that dark prison house until at length those members of his flock, who
knew him, thought that he was dead, and they used to perform services of commemoration
for him every year. And when they shut him up in prison, a certain believing woman saw
him, and she used to come to him by night secretly, and throw in food to him through a
little window. And he lived in this way until the righteous Emperor Constantine reigned,
and revealed the True Faith of Christ. And he commanded his officers to release all the
confessors who were shut up in prison throughout all his dominions. And that believing
woman went into their houses and told the priests about Saint Thomas, and what had
happened to him, and how they had shut him up in prison for two and twenty years, and
she guided them to the place where he was. And they came to him, and took him out of
the prison house, and they carried him on their heads, singing as they went, until they
brought him into the church and set him on the throne before the sanctuary. And all the
Christians came and received a blessing from him, and they kissed [the places of] his
eyelids, which had been cut off. And when the Emperor Constantine assembled the
General Council of the Three Hundred and Eighteen holy Bishops in the city of Nicea, this
father was present with them; and the Emperor Constantine embraced them, and received a
blessing from them. And when one made known unto him the fight of this holy father, he
drew nigh unto him, and bowed low before him, and he kissed all the places whereupon his
limbs had been cut off, and he stroked his face and eyes. And after they had disputed with
Arius, the apostate, and vanquished him, and had excommunicated him and cursed him,
and driven him out, even as the Holy Spirit taught them, and they had proclaimed with
their tongues the True Faith, and drawn up the Law and the Judicial Regulations and the
Canons, this holy father Abba Thomas departed to the seat of his office. And he
assembled the priests and all his flock, and he proclaimed to them the True Faith, and he
explained unto them what they found difficult, and he made them to understand it, and he
commanded them to keep it and to wax strong therein. And after this he lived a few days,
and having pleased God he died in peace; and all the days of his office were forty years.
And he departed to God bearing a crown of victory, and inherited everlasting life.
Salutation to Thomas.
And on this day also nine (or, ninety) thousand martyrs of the company of Saint Thomas
were crowned.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
On this day also died Saint Antilarius. This holy man was an officer of the tax-gatherers,
and he had no mercy on anyone. One day certain poor folk were sitting in the sun, and
they began to mention the names of the charitable and the avaricious, and they mentioned
717

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the name of Antilarius as that of a man who had never bestowed any alms on any one of
them. And one of the poor said, “What will ye give me if I succeed in drawing a gift from
him?” And they promised to give him something. And the needy man went to Antilarius
and begged for alms from him, and Antilarius wanted to throw a stone at him in great
wrath, but as he had no stone he threw at him the piece of bread-crust, which was left, in
his hand. And taking this the beggar went to his companions, and told them that he had
received alms from Antilarius. And Antilarius had a dream, and in it he saw himself at the
Judgment, and certain black men were disputing concerning him, and there were other men
there who were white; now their faces were austere, and they said, “We cannot find
attributed to him any alms except the piece of bread-crust”; and when the speaker cast the
bread into the scales it balanced exactly all his sins. When he awoke from his sleep he
distributed all his possessions among the poor and he departed to Jerusalem where he sold
himself for three dinars, and [he gave away] in alms the price of his sale, and he lived and
served like a slave. And when the slaves of his lord caused him sorrow, a shining man
appeared unto him, and said unto him, “Sorrow not, for I have received the price of thy
sale, and behold it is here in my hand.” When certain men who had come from his city
revealed what he had done, he fled secretly and came to the gates of the city, the keeper of
which was deaf and dumb. When Antilarius said unto him, “Open the gates to me,” there
went forth from his mouth something which was like unto fire, and the ears of the gatekeeper were opened, and he spoke with his mouth, and he opened the gates to Antilarius
who went forth into the desert and died there. When the people missed him, the gatekeeper
told them all that had happened, and they marveled at his holiness and at his admirable
behavior.
And on this day also died Abba John of Debra Tsege. This holy man by means of
excessive fasting, and prayers, and vigil made his body emaciated, and he became like a
dried clod of earth. One day when certain men poured over him a cupful of water, because
of the excessive dryness of his skin he left only unabsorbed a very small portion of it.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 25
(August 31)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Andrianus, and four and twenty other men who were with him, were
martyred. This Saint Andrianus was one of the imperial officers, and was captain of the
young men, and whilst Maximianus was torturing the Christians, because they refused to
worship idols, Saint Andrianus saw their boldness of heart and patience under suffering,
and he said unto the saints, “What do ye expect to get that ye endure such sufferings?”
And the holy martyrs said unto him, “Our mouths are unable to describe the hoped-for
things which await us,” and they told him in the words of the Law and the Prophets about
Christ. When Andrianus heard this he went to the officers and scribes, and said unto them,
“I am a Christian. Write down my name with the names of the fighters.” And when they
told the Emperor Maximianus this, he called him and said unto him, “Hast thou gone
made, O Andrianus? Dost thou wish to be destroyed for nothing?” And Andrianus said
718

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
unto him, “I am not mad now, but I have turned aside from my former madness.” When
the emperor heard this he commanded the soldiers to cast him into prison with the holy
martyrs; and one of his slaves told his wife Antolia, and when she heard it she departed to
the prison, rejoicing to be associated with him. And she kissed the fetters of the four and
twenty saints, and she besought them to encourage her husband to endure every trial. And
to him she said, “O my lord, let not this infidel lead thee astray. Thy beauty, thy grace, thy
gold and thy silver are all vanity; follow Christ so that thou mayest find with Him the
kingdom which never passeth away”; and having said this she went to her house. And
when Andrianus knew that they were going to bring him to the torture, he went
straightway to bid her farewell, and when she heard him arrive, she thought that he had
escaped from the prison, and she shut the door against him, and reviled him from the inside
of her house, saying, “Yesterday I called thee ‘martyr’ and to-day thou hast denied
Christ!” And when Andrianus saw [the strength] of her Faith, he marveled exceedingly,
and said unto her, “Open to me, O my sister, for I have come to bid thee farewell.” When
she heard this she opened the door to him; and then he took her into the prison, telling her
everything. And when Antolia had come into the prison she saluted the saints, and washed
their wounds. And the overseer commanded his men to bring the saints out of prison, and
when he saw that they were exhausted by their torturing, he set Andrianus in front of them,
and said unto him, “Sacrifice to the gods”; and when Andrianus reviled him the governor
commanded them to beat him with sticks. When Antolia heard this she entreated the saints
to pray for him. And the governor also commanded the soldiers to beat him on his belly,
until his bowels gushed out. Now at that time Andrianus was eight and twenty years old.
And then they took him into the prison with the holy martyrs, and Antolia came and wiped
away the blood from Andrianus and the saints, and she embraced him, saying, “Rejoice,
for thy name is written in the heavens.” And then the governor commanded the soldiers to
bring a blacksmith’s hammer and to break the thighs of the saints therewith. And Antolia
placed first of all the hands and the feet of Andrianus under the hammer, and the soldiers
smote, and broke off his hands and his feet, and smashed his bones, and at length he
delivered up his soul. Similarly they smashed the thighs of all the saints, and cast their
bodies into the fire, which did them no harm. And then the believers took their bodies to
another city, and they hid them until the days of persecution were passed. And Antolia
took the portions of the hands of Andrianus which had been cut off, and laid them by her
pillow. And then the governor of the city wished to marry her, and as soon as she heard
about it she fled by boat, taking the fragments of the hands of Andrianus with her. And
she came to the place where the bodies of the saints were, and she asked them to receive
her with them, and God accepted her petition, and she died whilst she was sleeping, and
was buried with the saints. Salutation to Andrianus.
And on this day also died the holy father Abba Bisaryon (Bessarion) the Great. The
parents of this saint were faithful Christians and God-fearing people. When this father
grew up he wished to put on the garb of the monastic life, that is to say, the garb of the
angels, and to devote himself to God. And he went forth from this world, and renounced
it, and he departed to Saint Abba Anthony, and became his disciple and ministered unto
him for many years. And after this he went to Abba Macarius, and ministered unto the
holy elders who were monks. and then he wandered about in the desert of Scete; he never
lodged in a place which had a roof, and he possessed absolutely nothing. He had neither a
whole garment nor a bed, but only rags of coarse hairy sackcloth, which he girded about
his loins, and he used to go round to the cells and caves of the monks, and sit down by the
side of the doors thereof weeping. And when there went out to him someone who knew
719

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him [not], and said unto him, “O my father, what maketh thee weep?” [the saint would
reply,] “My riches have all been destroyed, and I have escaped from death. My family has
fallen from honor into disgrace.” He who did not understand what his words meant would
console him, and say unto him, “God shall restore to thee thy riches which have been
destroyed,” and give him some bread; and the saint would take it and go and give it to
others. But those who understood what his words meant would know that what he was
referring to was the spoliation of the virtues of the children of man by Satan. His purity,
and virginity, and sincerity resembled those of the angels. And the fathers have described
the fights which he fought in his spiritual battles when he lived among them; thus for forty
days he never lay down on the ground at all to sleep, and on many occasions, during his
spiritual fights, he often fasted for forty days at a time. And he continued to fight the
spiritual fight for seven and forty years. And many great miracles were made manifest
through him and of these the holy elders and monks speak. Saint Dulas and Saint John
relate a story concerning him, and say that they went with him to the shore of the Red Sea,
and that they were suffering exceedingly from thirst. And when he knew that they were
thirsty he prayed to God and made the bitter water sweet, and they drank thereof. And on
another occasion he came to the river Takazze, [wishing] to cross over, and that as he
found no ferry he prayed, and [then] walked on his feet on the surface of the water to the
other side. And one day they brought to Scete a man who had a devil that the holy elders
might heal him by their prayers. And the fathers discussed the matter among themselves
and said, “If we acquaint the holy elder Abba Bisaryon (Bessarion) with the story of the
man in whom is a devil he will not heal [him], for he fleeth from [worldly] honor and [the
praise] of men.” And the fathers made a plan, and they caused the man in whom was a
devil to lie down in the church, on the place where Abba Bisaryon (Bessarion) used to
stand up to pray. And when the saint came into the church and found the man there asleep,
he woke him up and seized him by his hands, and said unto him, “Rise up,” and the man
rose up straightway, sound in heart and healed of his disease. And those who saw him
marveled exceedingly, and they glorified God for the grace which is given unto those who
fear him. And this father performed very many miracles besides this, and he pleased God
and died in peace. Salutation to Abba Bisaryon (Bessarion).
And on this day also are commemorated Elianus the martyr, and his sister Eudoxia.
Salutation to the company of priests of the brotherhood of Andrianus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 26
(September 01)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Saint Moyses and his sister Sara became martyrs. The parents of these saints
were righteous folk, and they were exceedingly rich. After the death of their parents Saint
Moyses wanted to give his sister in marriage, and to hand over to her all the possession
which their father had left them, and to go and become a monk. And his sister answered
and said unto him, “If thou wouldst first of all marry thyself, thou canst then get me
720

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
married.” And he said, “I have committed many sins, and I want to become a monk to blot
out my sins, I cannot think about marriage, but only about the salvation of my soul.” And
she answered and said unto him, “O my brother, how canst thou cast me into the net of this
transitory world, and think of the saving of thine own soul only?” and he said unto her, “If
thou wishest for the ascetic life, thou thyself knowest”; and she answered and said unto
him, “What thou doest for thyself, I likewise will do for myself, for we both are of one
nature, and are from the same father, and the same mother.” And when he saw the strength
of her will he rose up forthwith and gave all his goods to the poor and needy, and then he
brought his sister to a convent for virgins, which was outside Alexandria. And he entered
a monastery and he devoted himself to the ascetic life, and fought a great spiritual fight,
and his sister did likewise; and the two remained for ten years without meeting. And in the
days of the kingdom of Severianus, the infidel, and under the rule of Abba Demetrius,
Archbishop in the city of Alexandria, that wicked emperor afflicted the Christian people,
and there were very many martyrs in his days, [among them] being many heads of
monasteries. And Saint Moyses rose up, and sent a letter to his sister Sara, to greet her and
to inform her that he wished to become a martyr; and when she heard she rose up
straightway and asked the abbess to release her, so that she might go and become a martyr;
and the abbess prayed over her and embraced her and let her go. And Sara embraced the
virgins, and she departed to her brother, and found him on the road wishing to go into the
city of Alexandria. And the two of them came into the city of Alexandria, and confessed
our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor; and he tortured them severely, and afterwards
the soldiers cut off their heads with the sword, and they received crowns of martyrdom in
the kingdom of the heavens. Salutation to you Sara and Moyses.
And on this day also are commemorated Abba Ammon, and Elias, the martyr, and his
sister Eudoxia, and Abuna Jacob.
And on this day also Agabus the soldier and Thekla the nun became holy martyrs. These
saints fought the fight in the days of Lulianus the governor, one of whose officers tortured
them very severely, and then cast them to the lions; and they received crowns of
martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven.
And our fathers have commanded us that the people shall celebrate on this day a festival in
commemoration of the woman Sara, the wife of Abraham, whose womb was honorable,
and whose breasts blessed. When the King of Gerara wished to seize Sara in his
ignorance, God rebuked him, and told him that he was not to touch this woman, and he
restored her to Abraham, together with much money. And again, at the time when God
lodged in her house, and told Abraham about the birth of Isaac, she laughed inside the tent,
saying, “Can such a thing still happen to me? I have become old, and my lord is old.”
And God said unto Abraham, “Wherefore did Sarah laugh? Is there anything too hard for
God?” And then when Isaac was born, and she saw him playing with Ishmael, the son of
Hagar, jealousy seized her, and she forced Abraham to cast him out with his mother. And
although it was hard to Abraham, God commanded him to fulfill her wish, and he did so
knowing that from his seed Christ, the Savior of the world, should appear. And Paul called
her the “free woman,” and likened her to the Church. And then she died at a good old age,
and Abraham buried her in the grave which he bought from the children of ‘Emor, the
Hittite. Salutation to the womb of Sara
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
721

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 27
(September 02)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day Abba Benjamin and Eudoxia became martyrs. The parents of these saints
were believing folk of the city of Sabersir, and they showed affection to pilgrims and
strangers, and they preserved their purity, and devoted themselves to God, and fought the
spiritual fight. And they brought up their two children very carefully, and in the manner
which befitted the followers of Christ; and when the children were grown up, this Saint
Benjamin wanted to shed his blood for the Name of Christ. And he went to the governor
of the city of Setuf and confessed the Lord Jesus Christ before him; and the governor
tortured him severely, and shut him up in prison. And when his parents and sister heard
about him they came to him, and when they saw him under torture they wept and were
exceedingly sorry for him. And he comforted them and said unto them, “The life of this
world is as nothing, and the days thereof pass quickly, but life everlasting hath neither end
nor finish.” And when his sister heard this beautiful teaching from him, she said unto him,
“O my brother, as God liveth, from this time onward I will never leave thee, and
whatsoever death thou shalt die I myself will die that same death with thee”; and forthwith
she confessed our Lord Jesus Christ before the governor. And the governor seized her, and
commanded the soldiers to set her with her brother in a dark place, and they did as he
commanded; and the saints remained in that dark place for twenty days without food and
drink. And after this the soldiers took them out, and hung heavy stones about their necks,
and cast them into the river (?). And the angel of God came down, and untied those stones
from their necks, and they kept their strength in the river (?) until they arrived at the port of
a village the name of which was Batra. And a certain virgin found them and brought them
up from the river, and they went and stood before the governor, and cursed him, and his
idols; and the governor tortured them severely for many days. And when the governor was
weary of their tortures, he commanded the soldiers to cut off their heads with the sword,
and the saints received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of heaven, and inherited
everlasting life. And a holy church was built in their city of Sabersir, and they laid their
bodies therein, and from them there appeared many miracles, and great healings for the
sick. Salutation to Benjamin and Eudoxia.
And on this day also is commemorated Samuel the prophet, and how God called him in the
days of Eli the priest, and how God made him a prophet to the children of Israel.
Salutation to Samuel, who sealed David.
And on this day also are commemorated Victor (?), the Alexandrian, and his mother Sara.
And on this day also is celebrated the festival of Suri’el, the fourth archangel, who
remembered the twelve sons of Jacob.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

722

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Nehasse 28
(September 03)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day we have received as an inheritance from the early fathers and doctors of the
Church, who were strong in the grace of the Holy Spirit, an order to celebrate the festival
of our holy fathers, the patriarchs, our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. As concerning
our father Abraham, the head of the fathers, who among the children of men hath the
ability to describe the virtues and righteousness of this man, who became the father of
many nations? He believed on God, blessed be His Name! and was obedient unto Him.
And he had confidence in the promise of God until he died, and he never doubted in the
smallest degree any of the promises of God. At the beginning the angel of God appeared
unto him in a vision by night when he was on the island, and said unto him, “Get thee out
from thy city, and from thy father’s house, and come unto the land which I will show thee,
that is to say the land of Karan (Harran), that thou mayest dwell therein”; and he came to
the land of Karan (Harran), which country God showed him. And when his parents died
God removed him again to the land of Palestine, and He promised him that he should
inherit it; and he had confidence in God’s promise until he died, and his heart remained
unshaken and free from doubt. Moreover, he knew, and believed, that God would give that
land to his seed after him. And after that God appeared unto him at midday in the form of
a man, as he thought, and with Him were two angels, and Abraham thought they were like
unto all the other men who used to pass along the road every day. And he made a meal for
them, and God gave him the promise concerning Isaac his son, one year before he got
him. Now, at that time the days of Abraham were one hundred years, and his wife Sarah
was far advanced in her days. And Abraham believed God, and doubted not, and when he
got Isaac, God commanded him to circumcise him on the eighth day, on which day he
circumcised his son. And having believed, according to his confidence, there came to him
the seed which God promised him. And God said unto him, “Offer up as a sacrifice to Me
thy son Isaac, on the mountain which I will show thee, and that place was Golgotha, where
the body of our father Adam was buried,” and he neither doubted nor hesitated at the word
of God. And he took Isaac and laid him on the altar, and he knew that God was able to
take Isaac away, and yet that Isaac should be to him a seed. And having completed the
sacrifice of Isaac in his mind, though not in deed, God showed Abraham’s righteousness
and virtues to all succeeding generations. And then the angel of God called to him, and
told him not to stretch out his hands over the young man, and do him no harm whatsoever.
And God said unto him, “Behold, it is manifest that thou lovest Me, for thou hast not
spared thy beloved son for My sake. Therefore I will bless thee with blessing, and I will
multiply thee in great number, and I will make thy seed like the stars of heaven, and like
the sand of the sea-shore.” And it was even so, and God revealed Abraham’s work from
that time and for ever, and the report of him and his name were heard in all the ends of the
earth. And it is evident why he was called the “Father of Christ” in the flesh, for He
appeared from his seed ... And the spiritual fighting of this father, and his virtues, and his
righteousness, and his mercy, and his gifts, which were many, were very great. He did not
eat every day, but only when travelers came to him and sat at his table, and it is evident
from this that he sat with God and His angels before he knew Him, though afterwards he
knew them. And tribulation and great sorrow came upon him in his days, for he was
separated from his father, and from his kinsfolk, and he was a wonderer on the earth. And
723

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
when he arrived in the land of Egypt, he was afraid of the infidels in the days of Pharaoh,
King of Egypt. And when Pharaoh, King of Egypt, heard the report of Sarah, he called
Abraham and asked him, saying, “Who is this woman who is with thee?” And Abraham
said, “She is my sister,” and Pharaoh took her from him. And that night a terrifying angel
appeared unto Pharaoh, and wanted to kill him, and he commanded Pharaoh to send back
Sarah to her husband, and said that if he would not do so he would destroy him. And when
the morning was come Pharaoh called Abraham and said unto him, “Why didst thou say
unto me ‘This woman is my sister.’ She is thy wife”; and he gave her back to him, with
gifts, and much money, and Hagar her handmaiden also. And when Abraham arrived at
the age of one hundred and forty-five years, he departed to God, Whom he loved, and he
inherited the Garden of Delight and everlasting life. And he left a memorial for good
behind him unto the end of the world. Salutation to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
And on this day also our fathers and doctors of the Church have commanded us to
celebrate the festival of the departure of Abba Isaac, the son of Abraham, the patriarch.
This righteous man was produced through the proclamation of God and His angels, by
Abraham his father, and Sarah his mother. And he finished his fight, and the work of
righteousness, and he was subject to God, the Most High, and to his father Abraham, and it
pleased his father to offer him up as a sacrifice to God, but God redeemed him by a goat.
We know not whether we are to wonder more at the willingness of his father Abraham to
slay him, the child of promise, whom God gave him by Sarah when he was far advanced in
years (now God said unto Abraham, “There shall be unto thee seed,” and yet he spared not
Isaac, through natural affection, because of his love for God, the Most High), or whether
we are to wonder (and we know not which is more wonderful) at the subjection of this
father Isaac, and his consenting to his father Abraham, even to his slaying him and burning
him in the fire. Now Isaac was a child, for the Book of the Law saith that his father made
him carry the wood to a place afar off, to the top of a mountain, but the Book of the
Chronicle of Days saith that at that time the days of Isaac were seven and thirty years. And
this father Isaac submitted to his father Abraham, and he stretched out his neck to the
slaughtering knife, and the voice of the angel of God came and said unto him, “Stretch not
out thy hand upon him, and do nothing evil to him.” And as his father Abraham was called
the “Sacrificer” of his son in his mind, even so was this father Isaac called the “Sacrifice”
in his mind. And great tribulation and much sorrow came upon him in his days, and he
was a stranger to his country. And Abimelech took his wife from him, and when God was
wroth with him because of it, he gave her back to him, together with much money and
gifts. And this father was exceedingly simple in disposition, for the Book of the Law saith
that when the shepherds quarreled together about a well of water, this father left them, and
went and dug other wells. And he begot two sons, Esau and Jacob, and he loved Esau
because of his strength and might. And when he was far advanced in days, and his eyes
were feeble, he called his son Esau and said unto him, “I have become old, O my son, go
and hunt the wild animals of the desert, so that I may eat, and my soul shall bless thee.”
And Esau took his weapons, and went out into the desert. And Rebecca called Jacob and
said unto him, “O my son, rise up and kill one of thy goats quickly and take it to thy father
so that he may eat and bless thee before he dieth.” And Jacob said unto her, “I am afraid
lest he shall know that I am Jacob, and lest he be angry with me, for though I want to
receive [his] blessing, a curse may come upon me instead of a blessing.” And she
answered and said unto him, “Let thy curse be upon me, O my son.” And this took place
through her by the command of God. And Jacob did as his mother commanded him, and
he offered [food] to his father, and he ate and blessed him. And this father Abba Isaac
724

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
arrived at the age of one hundred and eighty years, and he died in peace, and was buried in
the grave of his father Abraham, which he bought from the sons of ‘Emor and in which
Sarah was buried. Salutation to Isaac.
And on this day also our fathers, the doctors of the Church, have commanded us to
celebrate the festival of the departure of Jacob the patriarch whom God called “Israel.”
This [righteous man] followed the examples of his fathers Abraham and Isaac in [the
practice of] mercy, and in giving alms, and in sincerity and humility. And his brother Esau
hated him because he forestalled him, and bought from him his rights as the firstborn with
a meal of lentils; now Esau was the firstborn, and Jacob acted craftily towards him, and
received the blessing from his father Isaac. And when Esau threatened to kill Jacob, his
father Isaac advised him to go to the father of his mother’s brother, and he went there, and
he was betrothed to the daughter of his mother’s brother, and he tended his flocks for seven
years, and he married her. And then he was betrothed to the second daughter of his
mother’s brother, and he served him for seven years, and also married her. And his
mother’s brother gave him a portion of his flocks, and it came to pass that when he said
unto Jacob, “Let thy wages be the sheep which are all of one color,” the ewes brought forth
only lambs which were all one color. And when he said to Jacob, “Let thy wages be the
sheep which are spotted all over; thus his wages were doubled, and he had many
possessions. And he returned to the land of his father, and he begot twelve sons. And he
saw the vision of a ladder on the earth which reached to heaven, and the angels of God
were ascending and descending on it. And when he woke up he said, “This is the house of
God, and the door of heaven”; and that place became the Sanctuary in the city of Jerusalem
wherein was to be buried the body of our Lord Jesus Christ. And then he saw a second
vision, and it seemed as if God were contending with him, and He caused his hip to be
benumbed and He called him “Israel”; and because of this the Jews do not eat the muscles
of the hip. And in his days came great tribulation and much sorrow. First of all [his sons]
sold his son Joseph as a slave to the Egyptians. And their father asked them, saying,
“Where is your brother Joseph?” And they said unto him, “The wild beasts have devoured
him”; and because of his excessive weeping Jacob’s eyes became blind. And after this
there came a great famine in those days, and they found nothing to eat, and at length Jacob
sent his sons into the land of Egypt to buy grain. And they came to Joseph their brother,
who had become steward to the King of Egypt, and he knew that they were his brothers,
but they did not know that he was their brother Joseph. And Joseph made a pretence to
them, and said unto them, “Depart and invite your father Jacob to come hither,” and they
invited Jacob, and he came to the land of Egypt and dwelt there for seventeen years. And
when the time of his death had drawn nigh, he called his twelve sons, and blessed them,
and he gave Judah sovereignty and made it known that Christ should appear from him, and
he blessed him with many words, saying, “The scepter of sovereignty shall not come to an
end in Judah, and the rule shall not depart from before his hand until He, to Whom
sovereignty belongeth, shall come, Him for Whom the nations wait.” And after he had
blessed him, Joseph brought to him his two sons Ephraim and Manasseh, so that he might
bless them, and he made the sign over their heads, and he laid his right hand upon the head
of the younger, and his left hand on the head of the elder, and he made his hand [to take]
the form of the Cross, indicating that the firstborn should be abased at the appearance of
the Cross. And he reached the age of one hundred and forty-six years, and he died with the
hands of Joseph resting on his eyes. And Jacob commanded him to bury him in the grave
of his fathers, and Joseph mourned for him with a great mourning, and the Egyptians with
him. And then he carried him on the chariots of Pharaoh, and with him were the great
725

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
nobles of the chariots of Pharaoh, and with him were the great nobles of the Egyptians, and
they brought him to the land of Canaan and buried him with his fathers. Salutation to
Jacob.
And on this day Abba Barsebu (Barsoba), and ten monks who were his disciples, and the
captain of the royal horses, became martyrs by the hand of the King of Persia, and eight
hundred companions of Isidore. Salutation to Abba Barsebu.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 29
(September 04)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day is celebrated the festival of commemoration of the Birth of our Lord, and God
and Redeemer, Jesus Christ, in the flesh, from our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary, for the
salvation of the whole world. Salutation to Thy Birth.
And on this day also Saint Athanasius the bishop became a martyr, and with him two
servants, Garsomes and Theodotus. Certain men reported to the king that Saint Athanasius
had baptized the daughter of ‘Antonitos the general, and the king seized him, and
Athanasius confessed before him that he was a Christian; and the king tortured him greatly,
but not only would he not deny Christ, but he increased his Faith in Him. Then the king
commanded the soldiers to cut off his head with the sword, and he likewise tortured the
two servants Garsimos and Theodotus severely, and he beat them and crucified them. And
then the soldiers cut off the heads of all three of them with the sword, and the saints
received crowns of martyrdom in the kingdom of the heavens. And the believers gave
much money to the soldiers, and the guards who were keeping the bodies, and they took
away the bodies of the saints and wrapped them up in rich cloths, and laid them in coffins,
and many signs and miracles appeared through them. Salutation to Athanasius.
And on this day also Saint Irenaeus, the Bishop of Sorem, became a martyr. They seized
this saint at the first hour of the night, and brought him into the governor’s house, and the
governor said unto him, “Sacrifice to the gods.” And Irenaeus said unto him, “I will not
offer sacrifice, for I am a fearer of God and I am His servant.” And the governor
commanded the soldiers to drown him in the river, and when he had come to the ferry, he
stripped off his apparel, and prayed to God to receive his soul, and to protect his people in
Sorem, and to give peace to the churches. And then he said, “I believe in Thee, O my Lord
Jesus Christ, and I make supplication to Thee as I suffer,” and straightway they cast him
into the river. Salutation to Irenaeus.
And on this day also is commemorated the translation of the body of Abba John the Short
to the desert of Scete; this took place after his death in Debra Kuelzem, which is the desert
of Saint Abba Anthony. And this happened in the days of Abba John, the forty-eighth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, who went to the desert of Scete, and the holy monks
said unto him, “We wish the body of Abba John the Short to be in the church of Abba
Macarius, that we may bow down before it.” And straightway the grace of God moved
726

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
him, and he wrote a letter [and sent it] by the hands of a certain abbot, whose name was
Cosmas, and with him was an elder of the country of Clysma. And when they arrived they
were unable [to do anything], for at that time his body was in the charge of Chalcedonian
Melchites, who were dwelling in that place. And the abbot, and those who were with him,
learned and made certain where that place was, and they returned and found certain men
who were Orthodox believers dwelling in that city, and they told them the matter
concerning which they had come. And after a few days a governor, who was one of the
elders of the city, was appointed over Clysma, and he was a friend of Abba Michael,
Bishop of the city of Clysma. And the archbishop wrote a letter to the bishop about the
body of Saint Abba John, and he commanded him to make plans, and to help his
messengers, the elder monks, so that they might be able to remove the body of the saint
from the hands of the heretics. And the bishop rejoiced with a great joy, and told the
scribe of the governor, his friend, and the scribe told the governor about the letter of the
elder monks. And the scribe said, “How can we find an excuse for introducing the monks
into the cave of the place?” And the governor said, “Let the monks put on over their own
apparel Arab garments, and let them come with us to that place”; and they did so. And the
governor departed having with him many people, and horsemen, and Arabs, and the elder
monks from the desert of Scete, and they came to Clysma. And the governor spoke unto
the Malachite bishop who dwelt in that place, [saying,] “Send out all our men from the
church, and let not one of them be left therein, for I wish to go into the church, and to
remain there the whole night”; and the heretic did as the governor commanded. And the
elder monks made ready their beasts outside the city, and they came by night and took
away the body of Abba John, and they departed and came to Mesr (Cairo), and hence they
traveled to the desert of Scete. And the monks of the monastery of Abba Macarius went
out and met them with crosses, and Gospels, and instruments of music, and incense, and
songs, and hymns. And they brought Abba John to Saint Abba Macarius, and all the
monks were blessed by him; and they sprinkled many perfumes over him, and they
celebrated the Offering. And at the time when the Gospel was being read a miracle which
was most marvelous was made manifest; the whole of the church was lighted up with
heavenly light, and was filled with the odor of very sweet perfume, the like of which never
was. And there was great joy. And the saint remained in the monastery of Abba Macarius
for six days, and after this they took him and carried him to the church, and his sons the
monks received him as the Hebrews received our Redeemer, and they cried out before him,
saying, “Blessed is he who cometh in the Name of God.” And they laid him in his place,
and signs and wonders took place through him. And after the death of this Saint Abba
John, Abba Mark the archbishop, who lived after him, went up to the desert of Scete, and
he entered the church of Saint Abba John, and bowed low before him; and with him were
bishops, and many of the elders of the city of Alexandria, and of all the country of Egypt.
And he uncovered the body of the saint and found it moist and hairy, and he was blessed
by it and wept with a bitter weeping. And when Abba Mark uncovered John’s body, there
was a loud clap of thunder in the church, and all the men fell in a state of terror and fear.
And the archbishop replaced the sackcloth covering over him, and then wrapped him in
fine linen. And they carried away the saint, singing praises and a spiritual song, saying, “O
thou who wast a swift cloud, and didst bear rain, thou didst go to the country of Babylon,
to the Three Children, and didst return to the city of Alexandria in the might of the Holy
Spirit, which was with thee. And thou didst also go to Clysma, and didst overthrow the
houses of idols, and didst preach the True Faith, and didst heal the sick, and didst cast out
devils, and didst return to thine inheritance; thou art a habitation of blessing, and a traveler
727

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to the kingdom of heaven.” And the translation of the body of Abba John the Short took
place in the five hundred and twentieth year of the Holy Martyrs (A.D. 804). Salutation to
the translation of thy body, O John the Short.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Nehasse 30
(September 05)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the great prophet Malachi. This righteous man was the completion of the
Twelve Minor Prophets, and he was one of the Twelve. And he prophesied at the time of
the return of the people from captivity in Babylon to Jerusalem. And he rebuked the
children of Israel because of their transgression against God and His Law, and also because
of their vile offerings, which they offered unto Him, for they did not give the tithe of their
goods, nor their first fruits, as God commanded them. And God spoke unto them, by the
tongue of this prophet, the reproach of God, and He said unto them, “Do mercy, give alms
to the poor, and testify ye to Me by giving tithe and first-fruits. I will open to you the
doors of heaven, and will bring down unto you blessings, so that at length ye shall say, ‘It
sufficeth us, it sufficeth us,’ . . . [And I will rebuke] the caterpillar, and the worm, and the
wire-worm, and the moth, so that they may not devour the fruits of your land.” And he
prophesied concerning the coming of John the Baptist, before our Redeemer, and
concerning the coming of Elias before him, and also concerning the end of the world. And
he prophesied concerning the habit of boasting among the Jews, and revealed to them that
there were [other] people on the earth, and priests and righteous men who offered up
incense and sacrifices to God, which were accepted. And having pleased God by his strife,
and ended the days of his prophecy, he departed to God Whom he loved.
And on this day also is celebrated the commemoration of Abba Moses, Bishop of the city
of Farma. Salutation to Moses, pillar of the city of Farma.
And on this day also Andrew performed a miracle when our Lord appeared unto him in the
form of the captain of a ship, and taught him the craft of a spirit ship. And Andrew said
unto our Lord, “Take me up into Thy ship, but we have no money [to pay] the ship’s fare.
Our Lord commanded us not to carry gold and silver in our wallet.” And our Lord said
unto Andrew, “If it be thus, come up into My ship”; and Andrew and his disciples went up
into the ship. And the Lord commanded one of the angels to bring three bread-cakes, and
he did so, and our Lord Jesus commanded Andrew, saying, “Rise up and eat ye bread so
that thou mayest be able to support the journey by sea”; and Andrew marveled. And he
said, “God give thee the bread of life in the kingdom of the heavens.” And the disciples of
Andrew could neither speak nor eat food through fear of the waves of the sea, and they
were not used to travel by sea. And our Lord Jesus Christ said unto Andrew, “Tell thy
disciples to go back to the shore, for they appear to be timid, and if thou wilt not [do this],
teach them with pleasant words [not] to be afraid--if thou art a disciple of God--for behold,
the ship is far from land”; and [then] the Lord Jesus departed, and sailed the ship. And
Andrew taught his disciples, and encouraged them, and prayed in his heart, and having
728

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
prayed they fell into a heavy sleep; and Andrew rejoiced because of this. Then Andrew
turned to our Lord, and said unto Him, “Verily thou art a master-sailor! Fourteen [times]
have I traveled by sea, and I never saw any man sail a ship as Thou dost.” And our Lord
Jesus answered and said unto him, “When we sail on the sea we often suffer tribulation,
but since thou art a disciple of our Lord Jesus Christ, the sea recognizeth thee, and doth not
make its waves to rise up against thee.” And Andrew cried out with a loud voice, saying,
“I bless Thee, O my Lord Jesus Christ, that I have spoken to a man who praiseth Thee.”
And our Lord Jesus answered and said unto Andrew, “Tell me, O disciple of God, why do
the Jews [not] believe that Jesus is the Son of God, for,” He continued, “we have heard that
He hath performed many miracles.” And Andrew said unto Him, “Yea, my brother, He
revealed unto us that He was God, and He performed miracles innumerable; He opened the
eyes of the blind, He made the lame to walk, He made the deaf to hear, He raised the dead,
He cleansed the lepers, He turned water into wine, and He took five bread-cakes and two
fishes, and having commanded the multitudes to sit down upon the grass, He brake them,
and of what was left over they gathered up many baskets full; yet, in spite of this, [the
Jews] have not believed.” And our Lord Jesus said unto him, “Doth He do this in public or
in private?” And Andrew said unto Him, “Some things He doeth publicly, and some
privately; but it seemeth to me that Thou art trying me.” And the Lord Jesus said unto
him, “Far be it from Me so to do! Tell Me, O my brother, that My soul may rejoice.” And
Andrew said unto Him, “O my son, may God fulfill for Thee every good work. But now
hearken to a miracle, which the Lord performed when we, the Twelve Disciples, were with
Him, and likewise many of the chief priests, and many of the people. We came unto the
synagogue, and our Lord saw two images, one on the right of the house, and one on the left
thereof. And our Lord said, ‘Do ye see that there are similitude of the Cherubim and
Seraphim in the heavens, which have been made by a man on earth?’ And He turned to
one image, and said unto it, ‘Unto thee, I speak, O similitude of heavenly beings which
was made by an artificer. . .come down from thy place, and revile the chief priests, and
declare whether I be God or man.’ And straightway the image leaped down, and spoke
like a man, and said, ‘O ye foolish Jews, whose blindness is not enough for yourselves, but
who wish to make others blind, why do you say that He Who is God is a man? This is He
Who hath fashioned man in the beginning, and who gave him His own breath to breathe.
This is He Who made Abraham and Who brought back Jacob to his native land. This is He
who giveth blessing unto those who call upon Him, and Who prepareth punishment for
those who do [not] submit to Him. Verily I say unto you that ye have denied God, and
have changed the Law. Behold, therefore, your synagogue shall be destroyed, and shall
become a church in the Name of the Only Son of God.’ And having said these words and
others like unto them the image held its peace. And we answered the chief priests and said
unto them, ‘Behold, the image hath spoken unto you and reviled you.’ And the chief
priests and the Jews said unto us, ‘this hath been done by magic. The image spoke of
Abraham, but where could it have found Abraham, for it is many days since Abraham
died.’ And the Lord Jesus turned to the image and said unto it, ‘they do not believe that I
have spoken to Abraham. Go and say this to Abraham, “Thus saith He Who formed man
at the creation, and Who made thee His friend: Rise up, thou and Isaac and Jacob thy sons,
and come forth! Come ye and rebuke the chief priests and make them to know that ye
know Me.”’ And when the image heard these words it rose up, now we were all looking
on, and it went to the land of Canaan, to the grave of Abraham, and it stood up outside the
tomb, and cried out as our Lord had told it [to do]. And straightway the Twelve Fathers
came out from the tomb, and said unto the image, ‘Unto which of us wast thou sent?’ And
729

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
the image answered and said unto them, ‘I was sent to the three fathers of the people; as for
you get ye back until the time of the Resurrection’; and when they heard this they reentered their tombs. And the three fathers went with the image to the chief priests and the
Jews, and they chided them, and told them that He was the Son of God. And then the Lord
Jesus said unto the fathers, ‘Depart ye to your places and sleep.’ And again He turned to
the image and said unto it, ‘Return to thy place,’ and it went back to its place, and became
as it was before. And although the chief priests saw this they did not believe. Now there
are very many other things which our Lord did, O my brother, and if I were to begin to
narrate them to thee I should never come to the end of the telling.” And our Lord Jesus
answered and said unto him, “I am able to complete the telling, and every hidden word,
and every word of the Faith. For the wise few words suffice, but if I were to tell them to
the fool, his soul would not believe [them] until he died.” And then when the ship was
approaching the coast and was nigh to arrive they held their peace. Now whilst our Lord
Jesus was talking to Andrew, He pretended to be sleepy, and He lay down and slept; and
Andrew seeing Him lie down lay down himself and slept. And our Lord Jesus commanded
the angels to take up and carry away Andrew and his disciples, and they went and laid
them down outside the city where they wished [to be]. And when the day came, and
Andrew woke up and opened his eyes, and saw the gates of the city, and knew that he was
on land, he was greatly frightened; and he woke up his disciples, and said unto them,
“What did our Lord do unto us at sea? We did not recognize Him, for He turned His face
into that of a man; it was He Who appeared unto us when He was giving us counsel.” And
they said unto him, “Whilst we were asleep we saw our Lord sitting upon the throne of His
glory, and all His angels were surrounding Him. And we saw Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the saints, and David playing upon his harp and [other] instruments of
music; and we saw the Twelve Apostles standing before our Lord, and there were twelve
angels before Him, and many other angels behind Him. And we heard the Lord saying
unto the angels, ‘Hearken unto the Apostles in everything which they shall say unto you.’”
And when Andrew heard this, he rejoiced greatly that his disciples were held to be worthy
to see this wonderful thing. And then he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and cried out with a
loud voice, saying, “O my Lord Jesus Christ, I knew that Thou wast not far from Thy
servants. Forgive me, O my Lord, because that when I was talking to Thee on the ship it
seemed to me that Thou wast a man whom I could instruct.” And our Lord Jesus appeared
unto Andrew a second time, and He said unto him, “I am He Who appeared unto thee on
the ship in the form of the captain of the ship, and I steered thee over the sea. Fear not,
neither be dismayed, for I will be with thee.” And having said these words He went up
into heaven in great glory, and Andrew departed on his way. Salutation to Andrew.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

730

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
THE THIRTEENTH MONTH
Pagumen 01
(September 06)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day the blessed Apostle Eutychius became a martyr. This holy apostle was the
disciple of Saint John the evangelist, and he was filled with the grace of the Life-giving
Holy Spirit, whilst he was ministering to John the apostle, and he was subject unto him.
He longed to go with Paul the apostle, and John commanded that he should go with him,
and he went with him into the preaching. And he preached in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and he converted many of the Greeks and brought them into the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and he baptized them with Christian baptism; and he destroyed the
temples of idols, and rebuilt them as churches of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he endured
great tribulation, and imprisonment, and beatings for many days by the infidels. And the
angel of God used to come to him in the prison house, and with him was the food, which
the saint ate, and which fire had never touched. And the soldiers also cast him to the lions,
but the beasts never attacked him, and they were friendly towards him, like sheep with
their shepherd. And then he went to the city of Constantinople, and the angel of God went
before him and strengthened him. And having finished his fight, and waxed old, and
arrived at a good old age, he departed to God Whom he loved. Salutation to Eutychius,
who was called the “Companion of John the evangelist.”
And on this day also the holy priest Besoy, the brother of Saint Abba Hor, became a
martyr. This saint came from the city of Antioch, and he belonged to an honorable family,
and because of the nobility of his kinsfolk, and his knowledge and his Orthodoxy, he was
appointed priest. And when his brother Abba Hor, and his mother Diodora went to the city
of Alexandria, and became martyrs on the twenty-ninth day of the month of Sane, this saint
rose up to go to the city of Alexandria to see their bodies, and to be blessed by them. And
he gave all [his money] to the poor and needy, and took nothing with him except three
bread-cakes and a staff of palm wood on which to lean. And when he arrived in the city of
Alexandria he enquired for the bodies of his brother and mother, and certain men guided
him and brought him to them; and when he saw them he wept with a bitter weeping,
because of his separation from them. And then he went to the governor and confessed our
Lord Jesus Christ before him, and he made known to him that he was the brother of Abba
Hor. And the governor commanded the soldiers to set a great pillar on his belly, and
straightway he delivered up his soul into the hand of God. And then the governor
commanded the soldiers to burn the body of the saint and the bodies of his brother and
mother in the fire, and the bodies of other martyrs, eighty-eight in number, but the fire
never touched them. And certain believing men took the bodies of Saint Abba Hor, and
his brother Abba Besoy, and his mother Diodora, and Saint Damon, of the city of Debeya,
and the body of Saint Bimakos from the city of Barmon, and Wursunufa of the city of
Tuluya, and carried them in a ship, and brought them to the city of ‘Ablasi with great
honor, and laid them in a good place until the days of persecution were ended. And they
built a church for them, and laid them in it, and many signs and wonders and many
healings were made manifest through them. Salutation to Abba Besoy.
731

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
And on this day also are commemorated Saints Pachomius and Serapion. Salutation to Serapion
and Pachomius.
Salutation to the imprisonment of John the Baptist.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Pagumen 02
(September 07)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died Saint Titus the apostle, unto whom Paul the apostle wrote one of his
Epistles. The birthplace of this saint was the city of Wartes, and he was the son of the
sister of the governor of the city, and his kinsfolk were Greeks. And from his childhood he
studied the learning of the Greeks, and he was exceedingly wise in his understanding, and
sincere in his disposition, and his acts were good, and he loved the poor and needy. And
one night he saw [a vision] and it seemed as if one said unto him, “Fight, O Titus, for the
salvation of thy soul, for this world is unprofitable unto thee”; and when he awoke from his
dream he was frightened and did not know what to do. Now the story of our Lord Jesus
Christ had been preached abroad and it was heard of in the city of, and the people thereof
talked among themselves about His doctrine and about His miracles. And when the
governor of the city, whose name was ‘Akrates, heard of this miracle he marveled
exceedingly, and he wished to know with certainty if the story which he had heard about
the Lord and His miracles were true. And he sought out a wise and understanding man
whom he could send to the city of Jerusalem to verify the story of our Lord, and to put His
miracles to the test, and to find out whether He was a being from the infernal regions, or
whether He was a magician, or whether He was truly God; and he chose Titus to send, for
he found no one better than he, and he sent him and commanded him to search into these
matters with very great care and attention. And when Titus came to the land of Judah, and
saw the miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ, and His marvelous deeds, and heard the Lifegiving words of our Lord, he distinguished between the words and miracles of our Lord,
and the words and deeds of the Greeks; and he found a great difference between them, and
he knew that the faith of the Greeks was as nothing. Then he believed on our Lord Jesus
Christ and followed Him. And he sent to the governor, his mother’s brother, and informed
him of what he had seen and heard of the signs and wonders of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
when our Lord chose His Twelve Disciples, He chose this Saint Titus to be of their
number. And after the Ascension of our Lord the grace of the Holy Spirit Paraclete
descended upon him, as upon the Apostles, in the upper chamber of Zion; and he went
with the Apostles into the preaching. And when our Lord chose Paul the apostle, this Saint
Titus followed him, and went with him into many cities. And after Paul the apostle
became a martyr in the city of Rome, this saint returned to his native city of ‘Ekertes, and
built a church therein; and he appointed priests and deacons over the cities which were
round about. And having finished his apostolic fight he departed to God, Whom he loved.
Salutation to Titus.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
732

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Pagumen 03
(September 08)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day are commemorated the glorious angel Rufa’el (Raphael) the archangel, the
third of the vigilant, holy and heavenly archangels; and the dedication of his church, which
was built to him on an island outside the city of Alexandria in the days of Saint Theophilus
the Archbishop; and the miracle which was made manifest therein, and took place thus. A
certain rich woman from the city of Rome came to Saint Theophilus the Archbishop, and
with her were her son and a picture of the glorious Archangel Rufa’el (Raphael), and much
money, which she had inherited from her parents. And she cleared away the heap of
rubbish, which was in front of the archbishop’s house, and there appeared from beneath it a
treasure of gold, even as we have written [in the section for] the eighteenth day of Tekemt.
And Saint Abba Theophilus built many churches, and among them was the church, which
was on the island outside the city of Alexandria, and was dedicated in the name of the
glorious Archangel Rufa’el (Raphael); and Abba Theophilus the Archbishop finished the
building thereof and consecrated it as it were this day. And whilst the believers were
praying in the church, behold the church trembled, and was rent asunder, and it moved
about. And they found that the church had been built upon the back of a whale of the
whales of the sea, on which a very large mass of sand had heaped itself. Now the whale
lay firmly fixed in its place, and the treading of the feet of the people upon it cut it off from
the mainland; and it was Satan who moved the whale so that he might throw down the
church. And the believers and the archbishop cried out together, and made supplication to
the Lord Christ, and they asked for the intercession of the glorious Archangel Rufa’el
(Raphael). And God, the Most High, sent the glorious angel Rufa’el (Raphael), and he had
mercy on the children of men, and he drove his spear into the while, saying unto him, “By
the commandment of God stand still, and move not thyself from thy place”; and the whale
stood in his place and moved not. And many signs and wonders were made manifest, and
great healings of sick folk took place in that church. And this church continued to exist
until the time when the Muslims reigned, and then it was destroyed, and the whale moved,
and the sea flowed back again and drowned many people who dwelt in that place.
This story was told by John, Archbishop of the city of Constantinople, to Honorius, the
righteous emperor. And he said unto him, “Know, O emperor, that we were sailing in a
ship to come to thee, and as we were going along we saw a church, on the island, on the
day preceding the Sabbath, and we came into port, so that we might received the Holy
Mysteries on the First Day of the week. And we found a little monastery by the side of the
church, with brethren and monks therein. And, by the commandment of God, we went to
them, and we said unto them, ‘O brethren, if ye have with you an old manuscript treating
of the days of the ancients, give it to us so that we may comfort ourselves therewith.’ And
they answered and said unto me, ‘Behold, we have many manuscripts in the sanctuary, but
we do not know how to translate them.’ And I said unto them, ‘Bring them here that I may
see them.’ And when they brought them to me, I searched through them, and I found that
they treated of the mighty deeds and miracles which our Lord Jesus Christ had performed
before His disciples, and also of the beginning of the heavens and the earth, and [they went
on] to the end of this world. And as I was examining these manuscripts, I found a
manuscript which was written by our fathers, the holy Apostles, and which treated of the
733

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
appointment of the Seven Archangels, and it said: ‘When our Lord Jesus Christ was on the
Mount of Olives with His disciples, He revealed to them the mystery of the Godhead.’
And the Apostles asked Him, saying, ‘O our Lord and God, we beseech and entreat Thee
to tell us about the glory of the honorable angel Rufa’el (Raphael), and what day Thou
didst appoint him, and in what month, and whether he is the equal of his fellow archangels,
so that we may preach him in the world, and that men may celebrate a festival in his honor
as they celebrate festivals in honor of his fellow archangels, and that men may pray to him
in the time of their sorrow and tribulation, so that they may find grace and compassion
with Thee, and his intercession.’ And straightway our Lord Jesus Christ commanded, and
the seven, and the three archangels, came from the third heaven, Michael, and Gabriel and
Rufa’el (Raphael) with great joy, and they bowed down before our Lord Christ: and our
Lord said unto the angel Rufa’el (Raphael), ‘Tell the Apostles thy name so that they may
know thy great honor.’ Now the Archangel Rufa’el (Raphael), a sincere (?) angel, is the
third of the archangels, and Michael the archangel is the first of all the angels; and his
name [meaneth] the ‘compassionate.’ And Gabriel is the second archangel, and his name
[meaneth] ‘God and man,’ and it was he who was sent to our holy Lady, the Virgin Mary,
to announce the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ from her.” And Rufa’el (Raphael) said, “I
make hearts to rejoice, and I am sincere, and good, and merciful to sinners, against whom I
never lay information concerning their sins before God; I speak only of my power to save,
and my sincerity, and my love for men. I send angels with the souls of sinners, and I treat
them with long-suffering until at length they repent of their sins, and forsake their
transgressions, I am Rufa’el (Raphael) whom God set over the twenty-three hosts of
angels, [and] we praise God the Father, and His compassionate Son, and the Holy Spirit
the Comforter. I am Rufa’el (Raphael) whom God commanded to give good things to the
saints at the Marriage of One Thousand Years in Mount Zion, when our Lord Jesus Christ
made them to drink out of the cup, which is filled with honor indeed, as they reclined with
Him when He sat on the holy throne. I am Rufa’el (Raphael) whom God commanded to
take up branches of the Tree of Life in my hand, and to give them to Christians on that day
[of] life and joy. I am Rufa’el (Raphael) under whose hands are kept the treasure houses of
the heavens, and I open them and shut them according as God commandeth me. And if
any man shall do a good deed to another man, who is in tribulation upon earth, for my
name’s sake, or shall write a book about my office, or shall remember any of the poor in
my name, or shall offer up an offering or incense on the day of my commemoration, which
is the third day of Paguemen, whereon God appointed me, and crowned me with the office
of the angels, I will bear them and transport them on the chariot of light, until they enter
the heavenly Jerusalem. And I will place in their souls scented branches with an
exceedingly sweet odor, the like of which shall never be found upon the earth. Ask of me,
O chosen Apostles, at all times so that I may protect you until ye stand before God. And
preach ye unto all men in all the world that they must celebrate my commemoration, and I
will make intercession with God on their behalf, and I will deliver them from their
tribulation, and they shall never see punishment.” And having said these words Rufa’el
(Raphael) bowed low to the Lord. And this glorious angel Rufa’el (Raphael), the
archangel, hath performed many miracles, and it is meet that we should celebrate his
commemoration at all times, for he maketh intercession with God on our behalf.
Salutation to Rufa’el (Raphael).
And on this day is celebrated the death of Melchisedek. This man was the son of Kainan,
the son of Shem. And when he was fifteen years of age God commanded Noah to send
Shem his son with the body of our Father Adam, and to lay it in the middle of the earth,
734

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
which is called “Keranyo” (Place of Skull); and he informed him that the Savior of the
world would come, and that they would sacrifice Him there, and that He would redeem
Adam by His Blood. And Shem and Melchisedek took the body of Adam from the house
of his father in secret, and he went there, and the angel of God guided them; and
Melchisedek was appointed priest. And he took twelve stones and offered up an offering
upon them, with bread and wine which came down to him from heaven, and which
revealed the mystery of the new Law. And the angels used to bring food unto him from
heaven, and his apparel consisted of a hide, and a hide girdle, and he continued to minister
before the body of our father Adam. And when Abraham returned from the war, and had
vanquished the kings, he offered him bread and wine, and Abraham gave him tithes of all
his possessions, and he was appointed priest and king of Salem. Salutation to
Melchisedek.
And on this day also died Serapion of Landun. This saint was learned in the Books of the
Church, and in the interpretation of the same, and he renounced all the possessions of this
world. And then he went and departed into the country of the pagans, and sold himself for
twenty dinars, and he took care of his dinars. He ate nothing but bread and water, and he
used to pray to God to turn [the people] from their error; and then he made them all to
believe in the Faith of Jesus Christ, and he taught them all the Law. And then he told them
that he was an Egyptian free man, and that for love of them he had sold himself; and he
gave them the money of his price to give to the poor. And he departed to another city, the
people of which were called “Mankayaweyan,” and he sold himself to them, and he served
them until he made them to believe in the Faith of Christ. And then he went to Rome and
lived and worked there, with fasting and prayer, until at length he died in peace; and signs
and wonders appeared through his body. Salutation to Serapion.
And on this day also died the good, and honorable, and Orthodox, and apostolic king Zara
Ya’akob [died 26th August, 1468] after he had established ordinances and laws for the
good behavior [of his people] in all the cities of his kingdom. Salutation to Zara Ya’akob,
the preacher of the Faith of the Gospel.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Pagumen 04
(September 09)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the ascetic, fighter, and anchorite Saint Abba Benjamin (Baymon). This
saint was from the city of Mesr (Cairo). There were seven brethren, namely, John, and
Job, and Joseph, and Basil, and Baymon, and Jacob, and Abraham, and they all became
monks. John was the most advanced (i.e. the eldest) of them in his days, and Abba
Baymon was most advanced in knowledge and wisdom. And they all agreed together, and
went forth from the world, and dwelt in places, which were remote from men; and they
bore the yoke of our Lord Christ. And they traveled on the straight road, and put aside the
honor of family, and the desire of their mother to see them. Now their mother came to
their abode, and she stood outside and having sent them a message she waited (?) for them
735

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
to come to her, so that she might see them before she departed. And they sent to her a
message, saying, “If thou wishest to see us in the generation which is for ever, depart from
this place”; and she understood, and accepted [their words], and departed. And this father
was a haven and a comforter of the old men and of the young men of the desert of Scete.
And whenever tribulation, and doubt about the Faith, or a temptation of the Adversary
[assailed any one of them], he would come to him, and our father would comfort him, and
straightway he was cured of his sickness. And this father composed works on Doctrine,
and many Homilies, and profitable Admonitions on piety, and the spiritual fight, and the
path of the monastic life. And he said in his teaching, “If thou seest a brother who hath
transgressed, despair not of him, but wake up his soul, and comfort him, and lighten his
heaviness, so that he may rise up from his fall.” And he also saith, “Teach thy heart so that
it may do what thy tongue sayeth.” And one of the brethren said unto him, “If I see a
brother who is good, I rejoice in him, and bring him into my abode, and make him to
rejoice. And also, if I see a brother whose works are inferior I do not wish to bring him
into my abode.” And Abba Baymon answered and said unto him, “If thou treatest well the
brother who is good, thou must treat that brother whose works are inferior with a double
portion of goodness, for he who is sick needeth healing especially.” And then he informed
that brother who was talking with him, saying, “There was a monk in the monastery whose
name was Timothy, and he fell into sin, and he was always weeping; and he wept, and
groaned, and petitioned God, saying, ‘O Lord, I have sinned against Thee; forgive me.’
And a voice came to him and said unto him, I will only cast thee off when thou despisest
thy brother in the time of his trial.” And this father Abba Baymon also said, “If we cover
over the sins of our brethren, God will cover over our sins.” And this holy father lived all
his days a life of spiritual fighting, and devotion to God, and he arrived at a good old age
and pleased God and died in peace. Salutation to thee, O mortal tongue of the seven
brethren who refused to see their mother.
On this day also died Liberius, Archbishop of the city of Rome. This holy father was
appointed over the city of Rome in the days of Kuenesta (Constantine), the son of
Kuenesta (Constantine). And Kuenesta (Constantine) having driven his brother, the
apostolic Saint Athanasius, from the throne of the city of Alexandria, and having also
driven out Paul, Archbishop of the city of Constantinople, the two of them came to this
father Liberius and asked him to help them. And he received them and brought them to the
Emperor Kuenesta (Constantine), and he wrote for them from himself a letter to his brother
Kuenesta (Constantine), and commanded him to receive them. And he wrote for them a
letter to his brother Kuenesta (Constantine) that he might help them. And when the
Emperor Kuenesta (Constantine) read the letter of his brother Kuenesta (Constantine), and
the letter of this holy father Liberius, he received them, and set them upon their thrones as
before. And when Kuenesta (Constantine) was killed in the city of Rome, Kuenesta
(Constantine) sent to this Saint Liberius, and asked him to help him, and to drive the
apostolic Athanasius out of the city of Alexandria, and to receive the Arians, and he made
him many promises. But Liberius did not accept this petition, and he would come to no
agreement with him, and the emperor banished him to a remote region; and then he sent
and slew the murderer of his brother. And after this he went to the city of Rome, and with
him were the heads of the monasteries and the chief priests, and they begged him to make
this father Liberius to come back from exile to his archiepiscopal throne in the city of
Rome; and he accepted their petition, and commanded him to return to his office. And
having returned to his archiepiscopal throne, this father taught always his flock to be strong
in the True Faith. And he composed many Homilies and Admonitions, and he resisted the
736

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
followers of Arius, and excommunicated them, and drove them out until he died; and he
sat on his archiepiscopal throne for seven years. Salutation to Abba Liberius the
Archbishop.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

Pagumen 05
(September 10)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
On this day died the pure and holy virgin, Abba Jacob, Bishop of the city of Mesr (Cairo).
The soul’s desire of this fighter from his youth up was to wear the holy garb of the
monastic life, which is the apparel of the angels. And he went forth from his city, and
departed to the desert of Scete, that is to say, to the monastery of Saint Abba Macarius, and
he took up his abode in a cave close by Saint Abba John the Short; and he devoted himself
to God and fought the spiritual fight for many years, and he was appointed Archdeacon of
the church of Saint John. And the report of his virtues, and his knowledge, and his sanctity
was noised about, and God chose him, and he was appointed Bishop of the city of Mesr
(Cairo). And having taken his seat upon the throne of his office, he added to his fasting,
and prayer, and asceticism, and fighting of the spiritual fight, and he did not diminish
through [the duties of] his office his former fight. He taught his people continually, and he
read the Scriptures to them, and he explained the obscure passages in them, and he
admonished them for continuing to commit sin; and he excommunicated them and repelled
them from receiving the Holy Mysteries until they repented. And when he had finished his
good fight, he fell sick of a slight illness, and he summoned his flock and taught them to
hold fast the True Faith. And he summoned the priests and commanded them, saying,
“Take heed that ye be not negligent at the time of celebrating the Mysteries,” and he made
them to know that they would deserve great punishment if they were negligent about the
celebration of the Holy and Divine Mysteries, and if they did not minister in holiness, and
in the fear of God. And he said unto them, “I am innocent of your sins.” And then he
made the sign of the Cross over his face and eyes, and stretched out his hands, and made
the sign of the Cross, and he covered his eyes with his hands and died in peace. And they
wrapped him in a beautiful shroud, which was worthy of bishops, and they made a great
lamentation over him, and they buried him in the tomb of the fathers, the Bishops.
Salutation to Jacob, Bishop of Mesr (Cairo).
And on this day also died the great Prophet Amos, the father of Isaiah the prophet, one of
the Twelve Minor Prophets. This righteous man prophesied in the days of the kings of
Israel, Joash, Amos, and Uzziah; and all the days of his prophesying were fifty years and
more. And he admonished the children of Israel and their kings, and the kings of Judah,
and he told them that God would not accept over many offerings, nor the things which they
did not offer up to Him in the days of Moses the prophet. And he prophesied concerning
the Passion of our Lord, and concerning the darkness of the sun on that day, and
concerning the lamentation and sorrow which should come upon the children of Israel after
this; and how their festivals should be turned into [days of] sorrow, and their joy into
weeping; and how they should lack the help of God; and how they should be scattered in
737

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
all countries among the nations; and how they should be driven about like spelt. And all
these things were fulfilled upon them, for they dwell [scattered] in the world unto this day.
And it is said that the people killed him when he rebuked them overmuch for their sins.
And he prophesied before the coming of our Lord Christ six hundred years before the
coming of our Lord. Salutation to Amos the prophet.
And on this day also died the holy, and blessed, and chaste Abba Barsuma, the “Naked,”
the son of Taban. This saint had God-fearing parents in the city of Mesr (Cairo), and they
entreated pilgrims kindly and walked in the way of God; and they were exceedingly rich in
gold and silver, and they had many possessions. And when they got this blessed son they
called his name “Barsuman,” and brought him up in the fear of the Lord, and taught him
the Doctrine of the Books of the Church. And when his parents finished their days at a
good old age, and died in peace, the brother of the mother of this saint took all the money,
which Barsuman’s parents had left. And when this Saint Abba Barsuma (sic) saw how he
had seized his parents’ money, he meditated in his heart about this fleeting world, and said,
“Our Redeemer saith in His holy Gospel, ‘He who wisheth to save his soul, let him cast it
away, and he who hath cast away his soul for My sake shall find it. What shall it profit a
man if he hath gained the whole world, and destroyed his soul? And what shall a man give
[as] a ransom for his soul? Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Son of the children of men
shall come in the glory of His Father, with His holy angels, and shall reward each one
according to his works (Mark vii, 35 f.).’” And the saint went outside the city, and did as
Job the Just did, and sat upon a dust heap for five years, in the heat of summer and the cold
of winter, and he wore no clothing on his body, but went naked; and his loincloth was
made of hairy sackcloth. And he said unto his soul, “O Barsuma, know thou that thou
must stand naked before God.” And he devoted himself frequently to fasting, and prayer,
and bowings, and vigil, by night and by day, for seven days at a time ceaselessly. And he
ate [nothing but] dry bread soaked in water, and at length his body dried up, and his skin
stretched itself tightly over his bones. And then he said unto himself, “I will rise up and
will depart from this place, so that men may not know me, and award to me the vain praise
of this world.” And he departed from that place, and came to the church of Saint
Mercurius in Mesr (Cairo), and he dwelt therein and fasted for three and thirty years. And
there was a serpent in a well, which was in that church, and men were unable to light the
lamp through fear of that snake. And God willed to make manifest the righteousness of
this righteous man, Abba Barsuma, and to make signs and wonders to appear at his hands.
And the saint went into that cave, and stood up and prayed to God, saying, “O my Lord
and God, Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, Who hath given unto us power to tread
upon serpents and scorpions, and all the might of the Enemy, I ask Thee now to make me
strong over this serpent which is in this cave, for Thine is the glory for ever and ever.
Amen.” Then he sealed himself with the sign of the Honorable Cross, and he sang the
psalm, saying, “Thou shalt be strong against the wolf and the serpent, thou shalt tread upon
the lion and the serpent” (Psalm 91:13), and having finished his singing, he seized the
serpent with his hand, and said unto it, “Henceforth be blessed! And thou shalt not have
power and might over any man, and thou shalt do no evil whatsoever to any man, but thou
shalt be subject and obedient to what I shall say unto thee.” And straightway that serpent
coiled itself at the feet of this saint, even as the lions crouched before Daniel the prophet in
days of old. And this saint fought a great fight against hunger and thirst, and he used to
fast two and three days at a time, and after this he fasted for a whole week, without
cessation or negligence. And the light shone upon him, and when he stood up to pray the
serpent would go away from him, and when he sat down and called the serpent it would
738

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
come to him. And there was a spring of water in that place wherefrom water flowed
unceasingly in the winter season, and in the period of cold, and he used to stand up [in it]
from sunset to sunrise, continually; and he used to eat dry bread, and food which had gone
bad, and was full of worms, and had been thrown away, and he drank dirty water. And in
those days there took place a period of great persecution of the Christian people in the
country of Egypt. And he passed all his time in reading the Books of the Church, and
especially the Psalms of David, and the histories of the ascetic labors of the fathers and the
stories of their abstinence. And because of this he loved the life of abstinence and purity,
and he spoke to men profitable words, saying, “Without purity no man can see the
kingdom of God by day and by night for seven days, and God received his petition, and he
taught the people Christianity. And God performed many signs and miracles by his hands,
and on many occasions made manifest to men his extraordinary spiritual fight. His
presence was handsome, and he was of fine appearance, and his face was joyful; he
rejoiced in being without a bed, and he possessed nothing whatsoever of this world’s
goods. He wore a tunic only, but he was [otherwise] naked, and his head was uncovered
and he covered his body with apparel, which was in rags. And he endured the heat of
summer and the cold of winter, and he laid no bed between his body and the ground, and
he fought the fight that he might reach the Heavenly Garden. And he found trouble
through evil men and devils; who is able to explain it? And in spite of this he gave thanks
to the Lord Jesus Christ who helped him in this difficult work. And whilst following this
course men heard of the glorious report of him, and everywhere men loved him. He was
the comforter of the old men, and of those who were in trouble and misery, and of him that
had been tripped up by the enmity [of Satan], and of him whom the temptation of the
Enemy or of an evil man had found; such an one used to seek and find with him healing.
And having spent thirty years in his spiritual fight, and pleased God, he died in peace on
the fifth day of the month of Paguemen in the one thousand and thirty-third year of the
Martyrs (A.D. 1317). And after his death John the priest, his disciple, thought in his soul
and said, “Who is there that shall comfort men after our father Barsuma?” “Abba Barsuma
had knowledge through the Holy Ghost,” saith his disciple. And he answered saying with
his holy mouth, “Know, O my brother John, I am far from all those who call me by my
name, and unto all who say unto me, ‘Abba Barsuma, the son of Taban, ‘ I say, ‘Behold I
will fulfill for him everything which he wisheth with our Lord Jesus Christ.’” And then
this holy father looked towards his left hand and said, “Behold, they have made the
reckoning about us, and they have not found against us any evil thing.” And after this he
said unto his disciple Abraham, “Give me a knife or a razor,” and he cut off his tongue
therewith, and cast it away, and he began to sing, saying, “The Lord illumineth me, and
delivereth me, who then shall make me afraid?” (Psalm xxvii, 1)--to the end [of the
Psalm]. And he sealed his face with the sign of the Honorable Cross, and delivered his
soul into the hand of God, and the angels of light carried it up to the Garden of Joy. And
he departed to God, Whom he loved, and he dwelt with the righteous in the Garden of
Delight in the kingdom of the heavens. And the monks wrapped him up in pure white
woolen cloths, and they took him and laid him in the church. And Abba John, the eightieth
Archbishop of the city of Alexandria, came, together with priests, and deacons, and the
nobles of the city of Mesr (Cairo), and a great many Christian folk, and they made a
procession in his honor with singing and instruments of music, and they buried him; and
they made great mourning for him many days. Salutation to Abba Barsuma.
And on this day also died Abba Magder. Salutation to Magder.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.
739

THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM
Pagumen 06
(September 11)
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND THE SON AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
ONE GOD. AMEN.
And if the month of Paguemen containeth six days he (i.e. the priest or monk) shall read
the following; any if it hath only five days, he shall read it likewise.
On this blessed day, O believing, beloved, and Orthodox brethren, it is meet that ye should
magnify our Lord Jesus Christ and His honorable Blood, and that we should praise God the
Most High, and multiply His praises, and exalt His highness exceedingly, because He hath
given unto us the grace of His goodness and the greatness of His compassion, which have
brought us to this hour, which is the end of the revolution of the year of mercy of Egypt,
and of Ethiopia, and Nubia. And we are sound and healthy in our bodies and souls, and we
are strong in the True Faith, following our holy fathers. And God shows patience towards
us, and He hath mercy upon us, and He waiteth for us to turn from our transgressions and
from our evil works. And He doth not destroy us, as He destroyed many nations who were
before us, but He abideth us patiently, and He waiteth for us to turn from our sins, an our
transgressions, and our folly, and for us to rouse ourselves up out of our sluggishness, and
for us to rise up from our fall. And it is meet that we should weep before Him, and cry to
Him to set aside His abomination of our transgressions, and our many sins, and that we
should ask Him to strengthen us in the True Faith in this world, and in that which is to
come, and during all the days of our life, and to preserve us from the snare of Satan, our
Enemy, so that we may arrive at the end of this coming year, and that we may be strong in
the True Faith, and joyful in good works, and healthy in our bodies. And let us ask Him to
give rest to the souls of those who have died among us, and may He set grace in our
country, and bless our land, and bring us into our abode in houses in joy, and in peace, for
ever and ever. Amen.
Glory be to God Who is glorified in His Saints. Amen.

740

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
LIST OF THE SAINTS, MARTYRS, AND EVENTS COMMEMORATED
IN THE ETHIOPIAN SYNAXARIUM

MESKEREM
DAY
1
Job, and his washing in the Takaze (Atbara).
Bartholomew the Apostle.
Melyos, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Melki of Clysma.
Raguel the Archangel
2

John the Baptist.
Dasya, an Egyptian soldier.
Didymus and Marina.

3

Dionysius, President of the Council of Bishops at Alexandria.
Earthquake in Egypt, A.D. 1112.
Dioscurus the martyr, the martyrs in Tensel Yakoton, and certain
martyrs in Persia.
Death of ‘Anbas the Ethiopian.
Death of Moses of Scete.

4

Death of Macarius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Simon the Anchorite, Joshua the son of Nun, ‘Ardase the Archbishop,
150 martyrs in Antioch, ‘Enteya, and Theodore.

5

Sophia and her two daughters (Faith, Hope and Charity).
Mamas the martyr.
King Lebna Dengel, David II (1508-40).

6

Isaiah the Prophet.
‘Ebnodi, Baslantya, James a monk, ‘Atimos a bishop, and the martyrs
Baslis, ‘Arontos, Rawrewo, Sawlwas and Sawa.

7

Dioscurus, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Death of Severianus, Bishop of Byblos.
Agathon, Peter, John, Ammon, Ammona, Rebecca, Fasiladas and
2,000 fellow martyrs.
Das, Gagra, Nawla, Bishop of Antioch, and Peter the monk.
Birth of Hanna, mother of the Virgin Mary.

8

Zacharias.
Death of Moses.
Dimasius, Lucianus, Jeremiah, ‘Andewa, ‘Elyanos and ‘Ammon.

9

Pisoura.
Fasiladas and 14,737 martyrs.
Miracle of Michael the Archangel.
Death of King Yasay.

10

The miracle worked by a picture of the Virgin Mary.
Death of Judith.
Birth of the Virgin Mary.
Matronya the martyr.
Athanasia and her three children.
I

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium

11

Basilides of Antioch.
Banafzez, a Persian lady.
Sures, ‘Ankityos and Maskhadra of Esneh.
Cornelius.
Death of Theodora.
Basil, Theodore, Bishop of Jerusalem, Caustus.

12

Michael the Archangel.
Council of Ephesus (200 bishops).
‘Aflahos and his fellow martyrs, and the translation of his body.
Luyuras and Galanicus.
Joachim and Hanna.
Stephen the Protomartyr.

13

Miracle of Basil, Bishop of Caesarea. (Story of the man who sold
himself to the devil.)
Isaac the martyr.

14

Agathon Stylites.
Macarius and martyr, Bartholomew, ‘Awedra, Naso and Degana.

15

Translation of the body of Stephen.
Peter of Daraw.

16

Building of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
Death of Tobit.
Warkela, Simeon, Marcianus, ‘Azyanos, Hali, Ronikos, Lucianus,
‘Azremanos, Peter, Hannah and Agathon.

17

Festival of the Holy Cross.
Death of Theognosta.
Death of Dionysius.
Liba, Cirianus, Justin and Tekaseltes.

18

Death of Eustathius.
The Empress Helena.
Death of Honorius of Segad.
Mercurius the martyr.
Festival of the Holy Cross.
Death of Jacob the Egyptian.
Stephen the priest, Niceta.
Discovery of the bones of Thomas and Athanasius.
Philotheus, Nob, ‘Aboli and 60 fellow martyrs, Euphemia, Fnomis,
Selhan, ‘Akalaeles, and Isaac.
Miracle of Thomas the Apostle.

19

Archbishop Gregory the martyr.
Festival of the Holy Cross.
Death of Cyriacus the dweller in the desert.

20

Death of Archbishop Athanasius.
Malidama, Athene, Marema, Pila, Abraham the monk, Rade’E, Sades,
Thaddeus, Epiphanius, Armenius and Simeon.

21

Cyprianus and Justina.
Festival of the Virgin Mary.
Death of Tiberius the Apostle.
II

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium

22

Cotylus, ‘Aksu and Tatos.
Julius of ‘Akfehas.
Balan.

23

Eunabius and Andreas, Eustathius and his wife, Thecla, 44 martyrs,
Gregory, ‘Ensina and Belina, and Abba Salama.

24

Gregory the monk.
Quadratus, Betrewa, Latayn, Archbishop Gabriel, Theodore, Netrolomes,
Ausanius, Nestius, Zianus, Justus, ‘Elsarey, Phratus, Cosmas and
Damianus.

25

Jonah.
Barbarah and Juliana.
Roka, John, Andrew, Peter and Antonius.

26

Gabriel’s visit to Zacharias.
Translation of the body of ‘Aboli.
‘Agati and 10,000 martyrs of Egypt, and George.

27

Eustathius and his wife and his two sons.
Death of Thecla.
Antilarius the tax gatherer.
John of Dabra Sege.

28

‘Abadir and Irene.
Death of Susannah.
Irene, ‘Ankuo Maryam, Stephen, Hannah, Porphyrina and Luke the monk.

29

Festival of the Navitity of our Lord Redeemer Jesus Christ.
Translation of the body of St. John.
‘Arsima and Agatha, and their companions.

30

Festival of St. Athanasius.
Archbishop Gregory of Armenia.
The calling of James and John, the sons of Zebedee.
Bula, Maryu, Peter, and ‘Asotares.
‘Absadi and Aaron of Galilee.
Death of Shalusi.

TEKEMT
DAY
1
Anastasia, Cheriton, Susannah, and Mary, the sister of Lazarus.
2

Archbishop Severus, Takla Sama’Et, and Heriacus.

3

Archbishop Simeon.
George, Macarius, Theophilus, Eumara, Gregory, Theodora
Nineveh and its people and tribes.

4

Bacchus and Sergius, Baba and Mama.
Ananias the preacher, Romanus, Gabra Krestor, John the eunuch,
and the consecration of the Church of Senhar.
‘Abreha and ‘Asbeha

III

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium

5

Archbishop Paul.
Cyriacus and Hannah.
James the Apostle.
‘Adrawos, ‘Awaras, ‘Aldrakwos, and ‘Endronos.

6

Hannah, mother of Samuel.
Pantaleon.
Rewak and Antonius.
Habakkuk.
Dionysius, Bishop of Athens, Josephus and Urianus.
Antonius, Bishop of Bana.
Enos, son of Seth.
Hermolaus, Heracletus, and Basalotamika’El.

7

Bawla of Tamaw, Minas, Hasina.
Cyprian and Justina.

8

Metra, Bacchus and Pelagia, Hor, Bula, Susannah and her children,
and Agathon.

9

Archbishop Liberius.
Stephen of Antioch.
The Eclipse of A.D. 1269.
Archbishop Simeon.
Thomas the Apostle.
David a King of Ethiopia.

10

Archbishop Eumenius.
Sophia and her three children.
Sergius.
John the priest.

11

James, Archbishop of Antioch.
Death of Pelagia.
‘Armami.

12

Feast of St. Michael the Archangel.
Matthew the Apostle.
Archbishop Demetrius.
Peter, Dionymus, Ya’Ekob, Abu Tefa, Theodore and ‘Aminus.

13

Ptolemachus, Zacharias the monk.
‘Eulana, Eulacius, Theodore, ‘Ablas, Nitolaus and ‘Abela.

14

Philip the Disciple.
Moses the Great.
Gabra Krestos.
‘Aragawi (Za-Mika’el), Trakwa, Damatius, ‘Emraya and 431 martyrs.

15

Bilamon and 560 martyrs.
Salation, ‘Atrakius, Yarpes, Andronicus, Armolius, Hermes, Harmoktis,
Admania and Samata, Abba Isaiah, and Silas.

16

Archbishop Agathon.
Macrobius, ‘Eblo, Abba Peter, Parebu and 45 men, Aron, Karbu, ‘Analyu,
Pawli, Mark and Gadel.

17

Filyas, Gregory, Archbishop Dioscurus, and Stephen Protomartyr.
IV

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium

18

Archbishop Theophilus, Romanus.
John, ‘Adrani, ‘Artematewos, Hephaestus, Luderius, ‘Asmanit and
his 7 children.

19

Bartholomew of the Fayyum and his wife.
Council of Antioch.
John of Dailam, Simon, and the martyrs of Al-Matra.

20

John the Short.
Elisha the Prophet.

21

Festival of the Virgin Mary.
Translation of the body of Lazarus.
Archbishop John.
Joel the Prophet.
Deliverance of Matthias by the Virgin Mary.

22

Luke the Evangelist, and his fellow martyrs.

23

Archbishop Joseph.
Dionysius of Corinth.
Joseph of Manuf.
Tenkeyake, Theodosius, Laos, Taxis, Josab and Andrew.

24

Ablarius, Sabla Maryam.
Paul, Longinus, Zaina, Ausia and Constantine.

25

Bula (“Abib).
‘Ebloy.
Consecration of the Church of St Julius.
Abba ‘Abel, and Dalila.

26

Timon.
James the Brother of Christ.
Huras.
Philip and Sawgenas.

27

Macarius of Kaw.
Paul of the Cell.
Julianus and his fellow martyrs.

28

Marcianus and Mercurius.
Maksu, Macarius,
Death of Japhet the son of Noah, and Yam’Ata.

29

Festival of the Nativity of our Lord Redeemer Jesus Christ.
Sakter and his servant.

30

Abraham the Anchorite.
Falibun, Kayna, Martes, Mars, Isaac the King.
Apearance of the head of John the Baptist.

V

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium

HEDAR
DAY
1

Maximus, Manfius, Victorius, Philip.

2

Archbishop Sanitius, Archbishop Peter.
Setenna, ‘Anesgesya, Abba Libanos.

3

Cyriacus of Corinth.
Athanasius and Irene.

4

Epimachus and Azarianus.
James and John of Persia.
Thomas of Damascus, Zacharias, ‘Abaydo and John and their fellow
martyrs, and Archbishop Peter.

5

Appearance of the head of Longinus.
Timothy, Abba Yohanni.
Translation of the body of Theodore and dedication of a church to him.

6

Archbishop Felix.
Appearance of Christ at Kueskuam.
Josa, Afros, Adinius, Justus, Marterus, Lucirius, Suninus, Bandicorus,
Eulasius, Cornelius and 8000 (or, 17,000) martyrs of the company
of Isidore.

7

George the Alexandrian.
Nahrew, Minas of Tamai.
Consecration of the Church of St George at Lydda.
Zenobius and Zenobia.
Mercurius and John.

8

Festival of the Four Beasts.
Festival of the Archangel Afnin.
John the priest.
Appearance of the Cross to Constantine.
Copronius and 484 martyrs.

9

Archbishop Isaac.
Council of Nicea.

10

Sofia and fifty nuns.
Council of Rome.
Paul and his three fellow martyrs.

11

Hannah, mother of the Virgin Mary.
Archelaus, Abba Elisha, Pachomius, Minas, Urania.

12

Festival of St Michael.
Archbishop Philotheus.
Ba’Eda Maryam, King of Ethiopia.

13

Festival of thousands of thousands of spirits.
‘Askanafer and his 13 disciples.
Timothy, Bishop of Esneh.
Archbishop Zacharias.
Lestelia, Mekrona, Mariana, Philopator, ‘Abrani, Honorius the Emperor.
VI

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
14

Canitus of Thrace.
Daniel, the miracle worker.
John of Bizan, Garses, Balaten, John the priest.
Laurestus, Andreas, Mabranus, Tratina, Justina.
Consecration of the Church of Kalmon.

15

Minas.
Abba Minas the Archbishop.
Maccabaeus of Kasbar.

16

Consecration of the Church of ‘Abunafer.
Archbishop John, Xystus the bishop.
Tatus (Tatia), Daniel the monk.

17

Translation of the body of St John Chrysostom.
Abraham, Harik, Shenuti, Kedus ‘Amlak, Walatta Petros.

18

Atrasis and Yona, Philip the Apostle.
Eleutherus and Entia.

19

Consecration of the Church of Sergius and Bacchus.
Bartholomew, Theophilus and Patricia and Damalis.

20

Archbishop Anianus.
Consecration of the Church of Theodore.

21

Festival of the Virgin Mary.
Gregory the Thaumaturge (i.e. the Theologian), Archbishop Cosmas.
Alphaeus, Zacchaeus, Romanus, John, Thomas, Victor, Isaac of
Eshmunen.
John of Asyut.
Translation of the body of Deborah (Tchebare).

22

Cosmas and Damianus, and 292 men and 49 women.

23

Cornelius.
Obadiah the Prophet.
Consecration of the Church of Marina.

24

Festival of the Twenty-four Priests.
‘Azkir and 38 other martyrs.
Kaltew, Gayyos, ‘Artyo, Dioscurus.
Joseph of Sana.

25

Philopator Mercurius, Acarius, Romanus.
Sabla Wangel, Queen of Ethiopia.

26

Pelarianus and Tatbusya.
Gregory of Nyssa.
Khirut and martyrs of Nagran.
Iyasus Mo’A, Gelyos, Mayen, Mekwas, Maryales.

27

James the “chopped.”
Timothy, Philemon.
‘Al’Are, Takla Hawaryat, Clement.

28

Sarapamon.
VII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
29

30

Likanos the priest.
Archbishop Peter.
The Birth of Christ.
The 47,000 martyrs in the reign of Diocletian.
Clement, Archbishop of Rome.
Acacius, Archbishop of Constantinople.
Mercurius.
Consecration of the Church of Cosmas and Damianus.
Gabra Maskal, King of Ethiopia, Anianus the Stylite, Peter.

TAHSAS
DAY
1

2

3

Elias Zelotes.
Naboth the Jezerrlite.
Peter of Gaza.
John, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Athanasius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Peter, James the persian, Elijah the monk, and Barsabeh (Bathsheba), the mother of Solomon.
The deliverance of the Three Children from Nebuchadnezzar’sfiery furnace.
The 733 slaves of Basilides martyred at Antioch.
Seften, ‘Anbas, Nathaniel, the worker of miracles, and Abba Hor.
Eutychianus.
The Entrance of the Virgin Mary into the Temple.
Phanuel, the ladder of prayer.

4

Andrew, brother of Simon Peter.
Abba ‘Os and the Virgins.
James, Zacharias, Simon, Theodore and Theophana.

5

Nahum the prophet.
Isidore the martyr.
Eugenia the martyr.
Victor of Shaw, the martyr.
Filgat (?), Ananias, Barachus (?) and John.
Philip, the father of Eugenia.

6

Anatolius the martyr.
Abraham the Syrian, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Consecration of the Church of ‘Arsima, and the translation of her body,
and the bodies of 26 fellow martyrs.
Batelsis, a priest.
Abraham Soreyawi II, a carpenter.
Ta’Amani, Sufit and Meryan.
Michael, Yolsawis and Ptolemy.

7

Daniel, Abbot of Scete.
Diontyras, a blessed woman.
Matthew, Archimandrite of Dabra ‘Aswan.

VIII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
8

Hieroclis, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Barbara and Juliana.
Abba Marina.
Abba Samuel and Kalmon.
‘Esi and his sister Thecla, and 407 fellow martyrs.
John of Damascus.
Yeres Kela, ‘Elkolonitos.
Eugenius, father of Abba Marina.

9

Ba’Amin, a bloodless martyr.
Badlamo.
Yawaremya, and Zacharias the monk.

10

Translation of the body of Severus, Archbishop of Antioch, to Dabra Zegag.
Theophanius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Nicolaus the archbishop.
Talases the Babylonian.
Lazarus the Persian.
Surset of Constantinople.
Abba Tewashi.
Milases and Tawfya.
Paul, a desert monk.

11

Bakimos the Egyptian.
Bartholomew, a bishop, and Batlan the martyr.
Theodore of the joyful face.

12

St Michael the Archangel.
Samuel of Waldebba.
Khadre of Dabra ‘Aswan.
John the Confessor.
The General Council of the Sixty Bishops in the reign of Decius,
which condemned Betnas, a priest of Scete.
Anicetus and his fellow martyrs.
Photinus.
Parsnuphis the martyr.
Abracius the Egyptian.
The conception of Hannah, mother of the Virgin Mary.
Michael of Dabra Kalmon.
Macarius, who fed upon partridges.
Abranicus the martyr, Horasafon.
Cornelius the governor.
Warktepos and ‘Arfra.
Raphael, the healer-angel.

13

14

Simon of Manuf, a martyr.
Abba Behur and Abba Minas.
Marhamnam, his sister Sara, and 12 fellow martyrs.
Gabra Krestos, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Ammonius, Bishop of Esna.
Nasahit, a princess.
Arianus, a priest, and his brother ‘Arkisos.

15

Gregory, Archbishop of Armenia.
Luke the Stylite.
Yemsah, a martyr.
Herwag, Ananias, Kazi, Sansaradin, Eugenius of Gawer.
Miriam, sister of Aaron.
IX

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
16 Gideon, judge of Israel.
17

Translation of the body of Luke Stylites.
Aularianus, ‘Euthyos, Suryan, Mark, Bartelel, and Nathaniel the ascetic.

18

Abba Salama.
Translation of the body of Titus from Crete to Constantinople.
‘Arkila and Philemon, a martyred priest.
Farkayon, Silikion, Galinicus and ‘Eunas.
Translation of the bodies of ‘Arsis, Dacia, Dimon and Thomas the Apostle.

19

John, Bishop of Burles.
The casting of the Three Children into the fiery furnace.
The Annunciation of St Gabriel to the Virgin Mary.

20

Haggai the prophet.
Theophania the queen, Eugenius and Mardio.

21

Festival of the Virgin Mary.
Barnabas and Mark.

22

Gabriel the Archangel.
Dekesius, Bishop of Teltelya.
Anastasius, Archbishop of Alexandria.

23

Timothy, a monk.
David, King of Israel.
Abba Samuel, Abba Gabriel and Abba Simon.
Macarius, Andreas, Philip, Eiteltas, Cornelius, Mercurius.

24

Esther, the niece of Mordecai and Jeremiah.
‘Aboli, whose head was cut off.
Felhasius, Basil and Arius.
The fathers of Kadih of ‘Aswan.
The birth of Takla Haymanot.
Pawli, the debater.
Ignatius, Archbishop of Antioch.
Fulgosius, Archbishop of Antioch.

25

John Kama.
Abba Darudi
The Maccabees ‘Abya, Sila and Pantos.
Nicolaus the governor and his wife.
Daniel the Less.

26

Anastasia the martyr.
Juliana the martyr.

27

‘Absadi, a bishop, and Hellanicus.
Abba Bag’U and Philip, an ascetic.

28

The Nativity of our Lord Redeemer Jesus Christ.
Paul and his fellow martyrs of Antinoe, 174 in number.

29

The Nativity of our Lord Redeemer Jesus Christ.
Joshua, the Judge of Israel.
Kuoril the camel man and Abba Gize.
X

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
James, Piles and Theodore, martyrs.
Abgar, King of Edessa.
30

John, Abbot of Scete.
Kerion, Philemon, and 40 soldiers.
John of Likos (Lykus).
Zacharias the monk, who fed serpents.
The Holy Innocents.

TIR
Day
1

Stephen Protomartyr.
Lavendius (Leontius ?).
Macarius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Dioscurus and Saklabius of Akhmim, and 8140 fellow martyrs.
Lydianus, Theodore and Paul, ad 9005 fellow martyrs.

2

Abel.
Hellanicus, Bishop of Weshim.
Theonas, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Consecration of the Church of the Virgin in the Monastery of Abba Shenuti.
Philotheus and Sybil, and 9700 fellow martyrs.

3

The Holy Innocents 18,000 in number.
Libanos (Mata’A).
Abba Ammon, who cursed women’ s hair.

4

John the Evangelist.
George, Matena the Archbishop, Theodora and Abba Likanos.
Nardos of Dabra Bizan, who killed a serpent by a prayer.
Sybil, the interpretress of dreams.

5

Eusegnius.
Matthew, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Yarewenyos and his fellow martyrs.
Negirus of Rome.
Alexandra, who visited Arsenius and ‘Awshia.

6

The Circumcision of Christ.
Noah.
The Ascension of Elijah into heaven.
Marcianus, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Basil, Bishop of Caesarea.
Abba Moses, who dwelt in the desert for sixty years.

7

Silvester, Archbishop of Rome.
Abba Ephraim.
Mosolon, Gregory, Mark, Antianus, Luya, Maylen, Sosyas and Marteya.

8

Consecration of the Church of Macarius of Scete.
Andronicus, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Benjamin, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Malachi the Prophet.
Andronicus the Stylite.

9

Abba Abraham.
XI

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
George, Nosmesa and Dioscurus.
10

Tawbentos (Theopantus ?).
Cynarius, Patricia the queen, and Tomiani.

11

Baptism of Christ.
Anatolius.
John, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Justus and Fayyos (var. Guedet).
Abba Wakris.
John, who gave 20,000 dinars to the poor.

12

St Michael the Archangel.
Theodore, Lavendius and Banikoros and 250,000 fellow martyrs.
Julian the martyr and Daniel the monk.

13

The miracle of Cana of Galilee.
The Seven Sleepers: ‘Arsalidas, Duamedos, Eugenius, Demetrius
Bernatius, Stephen and Irakos.
Carinus and Minas the Anchorite.
Abba Nakaro, who wore thorns under his shirt.

14

Mehra’El the Virgin.
Cyriacus and Julitta, and forty-four fellow martyrs.
Archilides of Rome.
‘Emrais the Virgin.
Maximus.
‘Abdeyu, a follower of Elijah.

15

‘Abdeyu (Obadiah).
Gregory of Naksesa.
Peter, Sophia, ‘Admira and Isaac.
Cyriacus and Julitta, and 11,434 fellow martyrs.
Gregorius, a member of the Council of 150 Bishops.

16

Philotheus.
Palladius, who lived in a cell for 50 years.
The 1500 men and three prefect of the company of martyrs with
Philotheus.
Sahma, one of the Nine Saints.
John, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Daniel the Syrian.

17

Maximus and Dumatheus.

18

The burning of the bones of St George.
Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis.
Mary and Martha, sisters of Lazarus.

19

The finding of the bodies of Behura, Basora and ‘Enira, and the
consecration of their church.
Abba Yafkerna ‘Egzi’E and Abba Tersina.

XII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
20

Prochorus.
‘Aklog (Eclogius).
Abba Behnu.
Consecration of the Church of John of the Golden Gospel.
Abba Noah.
Consecration of the Church of Mar Mehnam.
‘Alvanus, Nabyud of Scete, and Benwah the martyr.
Abba Kaluz of Fant.

21

The Assumption of the Virgin Mary.
Hilaria, daughter of Zeno.
Gregory, brother of Basil.
Nicolaus the martyr and Victor the bishop.
Paul the governor and Silas the priest.
Bakhayla Maryam.
Jeremiah, John and Caustus.

22

Anthony the Great.
Minas, Bishop of Mafen.

23

Timothy the Apostle.
Athanasius and Cyril, and the Emperor Theodosius.

24

Maria of Alexandria.
Abba ‘Absadi and Abba Bifa.

25

Peter the ascetic.
Sebastianus and ‘Askel.

26

The nine and forty martyrs of Scete.
Anastasia of Constantinople.
Mesratius, Sorenus and Joseph.

27

Serapius (or, Serapion).
Translation of the body of Timothy.
Suri’El the Archangel.
Bifamon.
Theophilantus and Sarnis.
The Ascension of Enoch into heaven.

28

Clement the martyr.
‘Akaweh and his 9800 fellow martyrs.
Abraham, Isaac and Israel (Jacob).
Joseph, son of Mahawe.
Tabela and her sons.
The blessing of the loaves and fishes.

29

Xenae the virgin.
Cyriacus.
Philemunma, Juliana, Sarabamon.
Gabra Nazrawi and the saints of Dabra Dagi.
The Nativity.
Stephen the “stranger.”

XIII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
30

Pistis, Elpis, ‘Agapis and Sophia (i.e. Faith, Hope and Charity).
Minas, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Thecla and her four virgins.
Irene.
Gregory the Theologian.
Christopher and his followers, 130,030 in number.

YEKATIT
DAY
1

Council of Constantinople, at which 150 Bishops were present.
Consecration of the Church of St Peter, the Archbishop.
‘Askenafer and his wife.

2.

Longinus, Abbot of Zegag.
Pawli, the desert monk.
The miracle of Thomas.

3.

Jacob the monk.
Translation of the body of Ephraim the Syrian.
‘Ebelo, chief of the anchorites.
Zenon, the wonder worker.

4

Agabus.
Zacharias.

5

‘Akrepinu, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Besoy, surnamed Peter.
Nob.
‘Eblo.
Translation of the bodies of 49 martyrs of Scete to the cave of Benyami.
Hippolytus, Archbishop of Rome.
‘Ebelo the shepherd.
Banwa, Bula, ‘Amoni and ‘Esia.

6

The raising of the body of Hippolytus from the sea.
‘Abukir, John, Theodora, Theophana and Anastasia.
Mary, who anointed our Lord.

7

Alexander, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Theodore, Archbishop of Alexandria.
The companion of ‘Ebeloy for seventy years.
‘Abraken, ‘Abadir, ‘Abarianus and Nebdelmas.

8

The entrance of Christ into the Temple.
Hannah, daughter of Penuel.
‘Ammata Krestos and her two maids.
Elias of Scete.
Baroma the Syrian.
Paul the Syrian.
Peter the martyr.
James, son of Alphaeus.
Justus.
Isidore of Farma.
Felos, Bishop of Persia.
Nicolaus, Simon and Sadalakos.

9
10

XIV

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
11

Belanteyanos.
‘Eulog, the friend of lions.
Abraham, a bishop, Kanti and Makabis.
Patra.

12

St Michael the Archangel.
Gelasius.
Derkalas.

13

Sergius of Athribis and his fellow martyrs.
Eusebius.
Philemon the musician.
Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Severus the lion.
John of the incense fingers.
Jacob, restorer of monasteries.
Victor.
Theodore, Kaphes and Hephes.
Birth of Victor.

14

Severus of Antioch.
Jacob, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Darius, Paul, ‘Abudiras and Sedna.
Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria.

15

Zachariah the prophet.
The consecration of the Church of the Forty martyrs of Sebastia.
Paphnutius.

16

Elisabeth, mother of St John the Baptist.
The gift of the Covenant of Mercy to the Virgin Mary.

17

Minas the martyr of Akhmim.
Death of Moses on Mount Nebo.

18

Melanius, Archbishop of Antioch.

19

Translation of the body of Martianus from Athens to Antioch.

20

Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Basil, Theodore, and Timothy of Alexandria.

21

Gabriel, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Zacharias, Bishop of Saha.
Onesimus, the disciple of Paul.
Peter, Bishop of Damascus.
‘Akyos and Gabriel, Bishop of Ethiopia.

22

Maruna, a Persian bishop.
Bula.
The 380 martyrs who suffered with Nicolaus.

23

Eusebius, son of Basilides.
‘Awsegneyos, Theodore and Agapetus.

24

Agapetus the bishop.
Timothy of Gaza and Matyas of Cyprus.
XV

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
25

Ausanius, Philemon and Likaia, a virgin.
Kona of Rome, Minas of Kus, Delmadius of Gaza.
Kumuta and Antonius.
Damayelnos, Reginos and Antony (Raweh).

26

Hosea the prophet.
Sadok and his 128 fellow martyrs.

27

Eustathius, Archbishop of Antioch.

28

Theodore the Roman, and his companions.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

29

Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna.

30

The finding of the head of St John the Baptist.

MEGABIT
DAY
1

Praxius, Bishop of Jerusalem.
Alexander of Rome.
Mercurius the bishop.
Methuselah.

2

Abba Makarawi.
Gregory of Edessa.

3

Cosmas, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Barronyos of Banyos.

4

The General Council of Daset.
Hanulyos of Bergya.

5

Sarapamon of Scete.
Eudoxia, the Samaritan woman.
Gabra Manfas Kedus Rabbuni.
Theodore, Abbot of Dabra Libanos.

6

Dioscurus of Alexandria.
Theodosius the confessor.
Antony and Arkaladius.

7

Philemon and Apollonius.
The Emperor Theodosius.
Theodotus of Galatia.

8

Arianus, governor of Antinoe, and the four Galatians who were
his fellow martyrs.
Matthias the apostle.
Julianus, Archbishop of Alexandria.
The Seven Sleepers.
Andrianus and his wife, Eusebius and ‘Arma, and forty martyrs.
Abba Nob and 2000 fellow martyrs.
Cythinus (or, Cutenius).

9

XVI

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
10

The Appearance of the Cross.

11

Theocnitus.
Basil, Bishop of the Pagans.
‘Alef, one of the Nine Saints.
Ausanius, Ephraim, Arcadius and Elias.

12

Balaam the magician.
Demetrius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Malazi of Felte’Em.
Joseph, who was healed of a sickness.

13

The Forty soldier martyrs of Sebastia.
The persecution of Macarius the Great, and Macarius the Alexandrian.
Dionysius, Archbishop of Alexandria.

14

Cyril, the 75th Archbishop of Alexandria.
Sinoda (Shenuti) of Behnesa.
Eugenius, Eugandarus and Alibidius.
The miracle wrought by Thomas on a woman.

15

Sara, an Egyptian nun.
Sulpicius, bridgroom of Stratonice.
Helyas of ‘Ahnas, Sephinius, and the “New” George.

16

Michael, Archbishop of Alexandria.

17

Lazarus, the friend of Christ.
Theocritus the reader.
Gregory the fighter, Talasius, and Joseph the bishop.
The translation of the body of Nikor, the high priest.
Abba Garima, who appeared to Melimo.

18

Isidore, friend of Sona.

19

Aristobulus, disciple of Paul.
Alexander the Egyptian.
Alexander and Agabius of Gaza.
‘Amilas of Bunitos.
Dionysius of Tripolis.
Ramelos and Thalasius, Egyptian vineyard men.
‘Askenafer and his wife Martha, and Arcadius and John his sons.

20

Michael, Archbisho of Alexandria.
Resurrection of Lazarus.
The Journey of our Lord from Jerusalem to Bethany.
Sege-Selase the ascetic.
Stratonice and her fellow martyrs, 6185 in number.
Consecration of the Church of Abba ‘Askaran.

21

Our Lord’s visit to Bethany.
The Virgin Mary.
The plot of the high priests against Lazarus.
Lamech, son of Methuselah.
Theodore and Timothy.

22

Our Lord’s ride into Jerusalem (Palm Sunday).
XVII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem.
23

Daniel the prophet.
Caiaphas and his Council.

24

Macarius, Archbishop of Alexandria.

25

Onesiphorus.

26

Eupraxia of Rome.
Perpeius and Saraius.
The washing of the feet of the disciples by our Lord.
Betrayal of our Lord by Judas.

27

Macarius of Scete.
The martyrs of the house of Yasla.
‘Ammat Wahed and ‘Ammat Hanna, who were burned to death.
Stephen of the bridled mouth and Agathon.
The Crucifixion of Christ.
Hezekiah, Abbot of Dabra Libanos.
Claudius, King of Ethiopia.
John, Abbot of Dabra Libanos and his fellow monks.

28

The Emperor Constantine, builder of churches.
Queen Helena.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

29

The Annunciation.
The Resurrection of Christ.
The preaching of Paul in Sharkon.

30

Gabriel the archbishop.
Samson, Judge of Israel.
Translation of the body of James the “chopped.”
John the ascetic.
Gabra Manfas Kedus.

MIYAZIA
DAY
1

Sylvanus, a disciple of Macarius of Scete.
The plundering of the monasteries by the Arabs.
Death of Aaron the priest.
Matrona, Justus and his wife.

2

Simon of Aleppo.
Christopher of the dog-face.
Mahalaleel, son of Cainan.

3

John, Bishop of Jerusalem.
Michael, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Marke of Antioch.

4

Victor, Decius and Irene and their fellow martyrs.
Isaac the abbot.

XVIII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
5

Ezekiel the prophet.
‘Aflamis, Theodora, ‘Arsani and Wasildes.

6

Mary of Alexandria, the harlot (i.e. St Mary of Egypt).
The appearance of our Lord to Thomas.
The deaths of Adam and Eve.
Births of Noah and David, King of Israel.

7

Joachim, father of the Virgin Mary.
‘Agabos and Theodora.
Metruf, son of Abba Muse.

8

‘Agali, ‘Erani and Susnonya.
One hundred and fifty martyrs in Persia.
Timothy the archbishop.

9

Zozimas.
Isidore and his fellow martyrs.
Shenuti, Archbishop of Alexandria.

10

Isaac, disciple of Apollo.
Gabriel, Archbishop of Alexandria.

11

The Abbess Theodora.
John, Bishop of Gaza.
Bakimos of Alexandria and Simon of Lans.

12

Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem.
St Michael the Archangel.
Anthony, Bishop of Tamaw, and Eusanius.
Gaius and Esdras.

13

Joshua and Joseph, disciples of Melius.
Dionysias the deaconess.
Banadleus.
‘Aklesotemos and four monks.

14

Maximus, Archbishop of Alexandria.

15

Consecration of the Jacobite church of St Nicolas of Mira.
‘Agabos.
The departure of the soul of John the Baptist.
Queen Alexandra.
‘Abib.

16

Antipas, Bishop of Pergamus.
Saba.

17

James the apostle.

18

Eusebius, a slave.
Peter, brother of ‘Ebsoy.
The martyrs of Tarshish.

19

Simon an Armenian.

20

Babnuda of Denderah in Upper Egypt.
Carolus and his wife and daughter.
XIX

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
‘Ammoni.
21

The Virgin Mary.
Berutawos (Protheus ?) of Athens.
‘Akresokos, Yak’A Sos and Yoras.
Habakkuk an Abyssinian.

22

Isaac of Harin.
Alexander, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Mark, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Michael, Archbishop of Alexandria.

23

George the martyr.
Roko.
Stephana, the friend of Victor.

24

Sana, the friend of Isidore.
Sanutya, Archbishop of Alexandria.
The consecration of Dabra Sina.
Abba Yasdera of Sina.

25

Sara of Antioch and her two sons.
Dara and John the archbishop.
Babnuda, Theodore, and 104 martyrs in Persia.

26

Susenyos, the son of Sosipater (?).
John, son of a Ninevite carpenter.

27

Victor, son of Romanus.

28

Melius.
Bistoweros (Christopher ?) of Maksur.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
Waslikos and other martyrs.

29

The Nativity of Christ.
‘Arsatos the apostle.
Acaciusm Bishop of Jerusalem.
Abba Gamos (i.e. the Buffalo) and many fellow martyrs.

30

Mark the Evangelist.

GINBOT
DAY
1

The birth of the Virgin Mary.
Bartholomew, the Crown of the Faith.

2

Job the just.
Theodore, disciple of Pachomius.
The twenty-two men who were martyrs with ‘Esi.

3

Jason the apostle.
Besoy of Balget.
Eusebius the priest and Sem the martyr.
John, Archbishop of Alexandria.

4

XX

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
Sosima and Noda, slaves of Victor.
5

Jeremiah the prophet.

6

Isaac of Defra (Tiphre).
Macarius, the Alexandrian priest.
Pantaleon, father of Isidore.
Dilagi (Pelagia) and her sons Sures, Kherman, Yanufa and Santonya.
Salome of Warab.
Dionysius and Pelagia, the Samaritan woman.
Sinoda the arch-anchorite.

7

Athanasius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
John.

8

John of Senhut.
The company of 224 martyrs who were with John, and Lulius and
Matthias of Scete.
Dionysius and his wife and children.
The Ascension of Christ into heaven.
Daniel of Scete.
Maximus the martyr.

9

The Empress Helena.
Baydar and Sylvanus.

10

Ananias, Azarias and Misael.
Thecla and Paula.
Abraham the artisan.
Consecration of the church of Abba Misa’El.
The 358 fellow martyrs of Abba Nob.
John the patriarch.

11

Theocleia, wife of Justus.
Paphutius.
Abba Asher.
Yared the hymn writer.
Onesima the virgin.
Euphemia.
Sosthenes and Yeketras.
Sophia and Euphemia, mother and sister of Isidore.
Bakimos, Ablanius and Julius.

12

The mission of Michael to Habakkuk.
John Chrysostom.
Isakos, a companion of Jesus.
The appearance of the Cross of Light at Golgtha.
Minas the deacon, and Stephen.
Yared.
Translation of the body of Takla Haymanot.

13

Arsenius of Rome.

14

Pachomius.
Symmachus of Farma.
Simon Zelotes (Nathaniel).
The 400 martyrs of Denderah.
Minas the deacon.

15

XXI

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
Hor, Baklawaya, Katinos and his wife.
16

Jesus Sirak.
John the Evangelist.
Yemen, son of Joseph.

17

Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus.
Lucianus of Degno.

18

The Descent of the Holy Spirit.
Abba Ga’Argi.
Sinoda.

19

Isaac of Dabra Macarius.
Isidore of Antioch, and 85,007 martyrs.
Abba Joseph.
Abuna ‘Egzi’E.

20

Kaleb, King of Ethiopia.
Ammonius of Dabra Tona.
Abba Hor and Abba Darama.
Heroda and Zacharias, and their fellow martyrs at Antioch.
Abba ‘Amoni.
Batra Wangel, Abbot of Dabra Libanos.

21

The appearance of the Virgin in Dabra Metmak.
Abba Martianus.
Aaron the Syrian.
Amos the prophet.
Mardala.

22

Andronicus.

23

Julian the apostle.
Ensia, Aphroiditus, Julia, Theodoretus and Tadros.
Julianus and his mother.
The companions of Isidore.

24

The visit of our Lord to Egypt.
Habakkuk.
‘Abkuelta.
Eleazer, son of Aaron.
‘Akledis, Teflas and Da’Ala Maryu.

25

Salome, sister of the Virgin Mary.
Cotylus, physician of Antinoe.
Heroda.
Balanus, ‘Alontran, Romanus and 250 martyrs.
Constantine and Queen Helena.
The planting of slices from Joseph’s rod.

26

Thomas the apostle.
Alphaeus, Zacharias and ‘Arsonwa.

27

John, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Lazarus.

XXII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
28

Gerlos and his 45 sons who became martyrs.
Paul and his 45 sons.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
Macarius, a disciple of Pachomius.
‘Ammata Krestos.
Translation of the body of Epiphanius to Cyprus.
Senta and ‘Agabos.

29

The Nativity of our Lord.
Simon of Antioch.
Abba ‘Afse, Abba Guba and Isaac the monk.
Alexander the Great.
Michael, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Sisticorus.
‘Arwa.
Dimadis.

30

SENNE
DAY
1

Consecration of the church of Laventius in Syria.
Joseph and Asenath.
Cosmas of Taha.
Bifamon and the consecration of the church dedicated to him.

2

John the Baptist.
Kerlos, ‘Akeltus and Questus.

3

Martha of Cairo.
Gorion and Hilarion.

4

Sanusi of Balkim, and Maria and the sorcerer.
John of Herakleia.
Bifamon and ‘Azenhas.
‘Akronius and Dimunasia.
‘Amoni and Mina.
Sophia and Ammonius.

5

Jacob from the East.
‘Ebsoy of Boha.
Bifamon, Mercurius, Feg, Eblag, Isaac and Ablarius.
Mark the martyr, who was drowned.

6

Theodore, an Alexandrian monk.
Two companies of forty martyrs and Gabra Krestos, a monk.
Eusaphius, Taman, Harwag and Bacchus, officers of Esna.
Eumenius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Sophia and her three daughters.

7

‘Abaskiron of Kalen.
The 1600 men who were martyred by Herminius.
The re-opening of the church of Mary the Virgin in Cairo A.D. 1304.

8

The consecration of the church of the Bath at Heliopolis.
A company of 1002 martyrs.
XXIII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
Abba ‘Atkaron and Eulogius.
Tamada and her sons.
Herminius and his mother.
9

Samuel the peophet.
Lucianus and four other martyrs.
John the bishop, and ‘Arkola the bishop.

10

Sophia and her daughters Dabamon and Bastamon.
‘Aklemos, Na’on and Yawsek.
The Edict of Constantine ordering the churches to be reopened.

11

Claudius, nephew of Numerianus.
The consecration of the church of the Forty soldier martyrs.

12

St Michael the Archangel.
Euphemia, who conquered Mastema (the Devil).
Justus, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Lalibala, King of Ethiopia.

13

John, Bishop of Jerusalem.
Gabriel the Archangel.
Cainan.
‘Abulag and 200 martyrs.
Matyan.

14

‘Akra, John, Ptolemy and Philip of Damanhur.

15

Consecration of the church of St Minas in Mareotis.
Gabra Krestos the deacon.

16

‘Abunafer (or, Abba Nafer), the first ascetic in Upper Egypt.
The “dwellers on the sand,” i.e. the monks.
Iyasus-Buruk.
The vision of Joseph concerning the flight to Egypt.

17

Latsun of Behnesa.
Palamon the anchorite.
Garima.
‘Akuoren, Palamon, Bartholomew, Alexandra and Alexander, the martyrs.
Joseph and ‘Arsema.

18

Damianus, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Isidore the martyr.

19

George, son of Balaw.
Besoy-Nob of Banos.
‘Arsonophis, Peter, ‘Ascarion, ‘Arengis and Belfeyos.
The fathers of Dabra Kua’at.

20

Elisha the prophet.
‘Arsastal and Minas of Busar.

21

The Virgin Mary.
Timothy of Cairo.
Thomas, the worker of miracles.
Kerdyanos, Archbishop of Alexandria.
XXIV

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
The boiling of Meron.
The finding of the bones of Stephen.
22

Cosmas and Damianus.
Paul the simple.

23

Solomon, son of David of Israel.
Nob the confessor.
Markora, Thomas and Philip.

24

Moses the Black.

25

Jude the apostle.
Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Pilate the confessor.
Peter and Paul.

26

Gabriel the Archangel
Joshua, the son of Nun.

27

Ananias the apostle.
Thomas of Sandalat, and his fellow martyrs.
A company of four and twenty martyrs.
Mamas, Silas and Lazarus the beggar.

28

Theodosius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Basil and Bifantius.
Consecration of the church of Timothy at Damanhur.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

29

The Nativity of Christ.
The Nine monks of Dabra Tona: Basadi, Cotolus, ‘Ardama, Muse, ‘Esey,
Nikales, Kal, Basodisa, and Cotolus (?), and 130 fellow martyrs.
Hor and Besoi, and their mother Daydara.
Mark the emperor.
Theodore, son of the Lion.

30

The Birth of John the Baptist.
Martha, Mary and Gabra Krestos.
Geran the Indian.

HAMLE
DAY
1

Cephronia the virgin.
Kalyos, Archbishop of Rome, Bartholomew and Gabra Madkhan.
Beyus and Benjamin.
‘Anagetyos the archbishop.
A miracle of Thomas in India.

2

Thaddeus the apostle.

3

Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria.
The Cherubim and Seraphim and the Holy Angels.
Coelestinus, Archbishop of Rome.

XXV

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
4

The translation of the bodies of ‘Abukir and John.
Zephaniah the prophet.
The Twelve Minor Prophets.
All the Prophets of Israel.

5

Peter and Paul.
Caustus and ‘Akrosia.
Agrippa, Anestia, Deweres, Karia, ‘Akrama, ‘Akrabania, ‘Akestiana and the wife of Altabius.
The Seventy-two disciples.
Sakue’el the Archangel.
Maskal Kabra.
Marcellus, a disciple of Paul.

6

Ezra Beher.
Sutu’el.
Saturnina of Jerusalem.
Olympius, surnamed Paul.
Bartholomew of Rosetta, and 1070 martyrs.
Claudian the archbishop.
Theodosia and twelve women.

7

Sinoda, the Archimandrite of Akhmim.
Maccabaeus of the desert of Hur.
Ignatius, Archbishop of Rome.
George the priest.

8

Besoy of Scete.
‘Aberokh of ‘Atom.
Belane of Bari.
Abba Mesa’el.
Esdros, Peter, his wife and son, and 49 slaves.
Bima of Behensa.
Kiros of Upper Egypt.
The 15 martyrs who suffered with Abba Nob.
Pawli of Tamwa.

9

Cleopas and Theona, a virgin.
Nathaniel.
Claudianus, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Besneda, who stood in a well of water.

10

Theodore, Bishop of Pentapolis, Lucianus and Dagnanius.
Abba Khelyan (or, Golyan).
Mar Matra and Andrew, Bishop of Kefala.
Consecration of a church dedicate to Sergius in Egypt.
Abba Esi and fifty-nine fellow martyrs.

11

John and Simon of Sermalak.
Isaiah of Scete.
Gabriel, Archbishop of Alexandria.

12

St Michael, who slew 185,000 of Sennacherib’s soldiers.
Hor and 127 men and 20 women who were martyred.

13

Basendius, Bishop of Coptos.
Ammon of Tuh.
Consecration of the church of Besoy.
XXVI

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
14

‘Abrokonyos of Jerusalem.
Macarius the Great and Ammonius.

15

Ephraim the Syrian.
Kharayon, Fere-Menatos, and 45 martyrs.
Cyriacus and Frumentius.
The miracle wrought by Peter and Paul in Rome.

16

John of the Gospel of Gold.
Sharda Hawaryat.

17

Jonah’s exit from the whale.
Euphemia.
Bedel, Zacharias, Aulenius, Marat and Isidore.
Ayna Sahay, Neron, Gida, ‘Awa and Aa.
The finding of the bones of Justus.
Andreas, Archimandrite of Dabra Libanos.

18

James, Bishop of Jerusalem.
Athanasius of Clysma.
‘Edrona and Tobia.
The 9000 soldiers of Antioch who served under Isidore and Andronicus

19

The martyrs of ‘Esna: Dilaj, Sares, Kharman, Yanufa and Sentonita.
Eusaphius, Taman, Harwag and Bacchus.
An old bed-ridden woman.
Surufas, Antichius and Mashadre,
Ammonius the bishop.
Cyriacus and Julitta.
Matlan, a physician.
Isaac.
Batrabo, Macarius of Falga Halib and Moses of Shoki.
Abel, son of Takla Haymanot.

20

Theodore the Great.
Hanna, mother of the Virgin Mary.
Theocytus, Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria, and Moses.
Julitta and Cyriacus and 440 martyrs.
Gabra Iyasus and Thekla.

21

The Virgin Mary.
Susenius the eunuch.
Birth of Eustathius.
Lawa-Krestos.
Uriel the Archangel.
Basalota Mika’el.
‘Oyoranos.

22

Macarius, the son of Basilides.
Leontius of Tripoli.
Markolos and Longinus.

23

Marina of Antioch.
Longinus, a Cappadocian Greek.
‘Abtlemanos of Shoka.

XXVII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
24

Nob of Nekhisa.
Takla ‘Adonaya
The company of martyrs of Nob, 14,084.
Simon, Archbishop of Alexandria.

25

The dedication of the church of Mercurius in Cairo.
The ascension of Enoch.
Za-Iyasus of Dabra Libanos.
Thecla, a disciple of Paul.
‘Andonin of Bana.
Isaac the gardener.
Liyarya of Lemdeya.
Thecla and Mugi.
Karazun of Banwan.
A company of 7300 martyrs.
Ladimadyos the Syrian.
‘Atrabius, successor of Pachomius.

26

Joseph the carpenter.
Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Abba Salama, Bishop of Ethiopia.
Abba Roys.
Samuel and Zacharias.

27

Ammon of Tarnut.
The vision of Ezekiel.
Dedication of the church of St John in Alexandria.
Translation of the body of Simon to Scete.
The death of Seth.
Bifamomon.
Maskal Kabra.

28

Andronicus and Athanasia of Antioch.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
Philip of Dabra Libanos.

29

The Nativity of Christ.
Translation of the body of Thaddeus from Syria to Constantinople.
Warestefa.

30

Mercurius and Ephraim.
Translation of the body of Timothy the Archbishop from Cairo to Scete.
Paul the monk.
Dedication of the church of Suriel in Constantinople.
Andrew the apostle, and Matthew.

NEHASSE
DAY
1

2

‘Aboli, son of Justus.
Hannah, mother of the Virgin Mary, and Hannah, mother of Samuel.
The Virgins Faith, Hope and Charity.
Joseph and Nicodemus.
Athanasia of Manuf.
Demina and her brother.
Eupraxia.
XXVIII

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
3

Simon Stylites.
Sophia of Rome.
Mercurius.

4

Hezekiah the prophet.
David and his brethren and Philip of Sengera.
Matthew the anchorite.

5

Abraham the second.
John, a soldier of Julian.
Philip of Dabra Bizan.
Justa of Caesarea.
Abba Wisa (Besa).
Mary Magdalawit.
Takla Mika’el.
Takla Iyasus.
Julia.

6

7

Gabriel the Archangel.
Aaron, brother of Moses.
Peter the apostle.
Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Joseph, son of Rachel.
Na’od, King of Ethiopia.

8

Lazarus and Salome and their seven children: ‘An’imo. Antonitus, ‘Ozya,
Lazarus, ‘Asyona, Semuna and Marcolus.
Ammon.
John, Abbot of Dabra Libanos.

9

‘Ori of Satanuf.
Pilate (?) the archbishop.

10

Matra.
Christopher.
Bikabos and John.
The Lawgivers and Evangelists.
A company of 3220 men and two women.

11

The 300 martyrs of Antioch.
Mysis, Bishop of ‘Awsim.
Ptolemy of Upper Manuf.

12

St Michael the Archangel.
Beginning of the reign of Constantine.
Basilides and 2000 martyrs.

13

The Transfiguration on Mount Tabor (Dabra Telul).
Safrifa, daughter of Moses.
Abba Galyon.
Benjamin, who was caught up in the body to heaven.

14

Simon and John Fekru.
The miracle of Theophilus, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Damiates, who was stoned to death.
Basilicus.
XXIX

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
15

Christina, a virgin.
The coming of the Apostles to the Virgin Mary before her death.
Marina the virgin.
Laurentius.

16

The Assumption of the Virgin Mary into heaven.
The translation of the body of St George from Persia to Lydda.
Gegar, the governor of Syria, who befriended the Virgin.

17

‘Entawos of Damascus, and ‘Akrates his brother.
James of Manug.

18

Alexander, Archbishop of Alexandria.
Justinus, who dwelt on a mountain.

19

The translation of the body of Macarius to Scete.
Phinehas.

20

Abba Salama, the interpreter.
James the pure.
The Seven Sleepers: Maximanus, Tamukigros, Mardimus, John,
Constantine, Antonius and Dionysius.

21

The Virgin Mary.
Irene, daughter of King Lucianus.

22

Micah the prophet.

23

A company of 3000 martyrs of Alexandria.
Damianus of Antioch.
Mary, daughter of Abraham.
Abraham, the friend of God.

24

Tak;la Haymanot of Shoa.
Thomas, Bishop of Mar’as.
A company of 9000 martyrs who suffered with Thomas.

25

Andrianus and 24 martyrs and his priesthood.
Bisaryon the Great.
Elianus and Eudoxia.

26

Moyses and Sara the martyrs.
Ammon, Elias, Eudoxia and the Abuna Jacob.
Sara, wife of Abraham.

27

Benjamin and Eudoxia.
Samuel the prophet.
Victor and his mother Sara.
Suri’el, the fourth Archangel.

28

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
Isaac, son of Abraham.
The death of Jacob.
Barsebu, ten monks, and the captain of the horse of the King of Persia.
The 800 men who suffered with Isidore.

XXX

Index

The Ethiopian Synaxarium
29

The Nativity of Christ.
Athanasius the bishop, Garomes and Theodotus.
Irenaeus, Bishop of Sorem.
The translation of the body of John the Short to Scete.

30

`Malachi the prophet.
Moses of Farma.
A miracle of Andrew.

PAGUEMEN
DAY
1

Eutychius.
Besoy.
Pachomius and Serapion.
The imprisonment of John the Baptist.

2

Titus the apostle.

3

Raphael the Archangel.
The death of Melchisedek.
Serapion of Landun.

4

Benjamin of Cairo.
Liberius, Archbishop of Rome.

5

Jacob, Bishop of Cairo.
Amos the prophet.
Barsuma the naked.
Abba Makder.

6

A Thanksgiving.

XXXI

